Pre-Show

MATT: Hello everyone. My name is Matthew Mercer, voice actor and Dungeon Master for Critical Role on Geek & Sundry, where I take a bunch of other voice actors and run them through a fantastical fantasy adventure through the world of Dungeons & Dragons. We play every Thursday at 7:00pm Pacific Standard Time on Geek & Sundry's Twitch stream. Please come watch us live if you have the opportunity. Back episodes and future episodes will be uploaded on the Geek & Sundry website. You can also check them out there. In the meantime, enjoy! Welcome to first episode of Critical Role, and what this basically is is a continuation of our weekly D&D game. Me and a bunch of other likely nerdy and enjoyable voice actors gathering around, rolling some dice, killing some creatures, having some adventure. Now we have the pleasure of bringing it on the stream for you to watch, enjoy, and occasionally interact with. Before we get to that, to give you a little backstory on the characters you'll be seeing this evening, we're going to play some videos for you in a second. Do note, for all you hardcore gamers out there, a lot of this is house-ruled, loosey-goosey having a good time. So all you number crunchers, stop paying attention there, just have fun with it. Nevertheless, we have some background story on many of the characters you'll be seeing this evening to help you jump into the story. Let's go ahead and enjoy those in a minute, then we'll introduce the players. So have fun!

TRAVIS: Right, listen up! If you have ale, then you have a friend in Grog Strongjaw! A goliath of towering height and size, this barbarian has an appetite for the two great loves in his life: combat, women, and ale!

[record scratch] Wait.

TRAVIS (CONT'D): Easily the brains of the group, Grog is often consulted for his vast knowledge of shapes, colors, and shiny things! Also ale. In his early years, armed with his two-handed greataxe, Grog often enjoyed proving his might amongst the ranks of his family's wandering herd. But after coming upon an unsuspecting elderly gnome in the woods, he objected to the killing of such an innocent life. A creature of impulse, Grog felt only pity for this– well, this terrified little thing. And his disobedience cost him dearly. Beaten bloody, and banished by the herd leader, his Uncle Kevdak, Grog was abandoned and left to die. Exiled from his herd, it was then that the relative of the very gnome he fought to save, saved him. It was the kindness of a gnome cleric named Pike that healed Grog, bringing him back from death's edge. And they have remained close friends ever since. Most nights, Grog can be found challenging entire taverns to wrestling matches! Or accompanying Scanlan to the nearest house where you pay for lady favors. Also ale!

MARISHA: A first impression of Keyleth would leave you with little information on the half-elven druid. You might even think that her social awkwardness due to her sheltered upbringing is kind of sweet. Of course, it would be unwise underestimate her based on first impressions.

[thunder crack]

MARISHA (Cont'd): Under that un-intimidating petite frame is a vicious beast waiting to be unleashed, whose natural powers have made even the fiercest of champions pee their pants, literally! Born to the Air Tribe of the Ashari people, Keyleth was raised with a deep love of nature and the elemental magics. It is her people's inherent duty to protect the delicate areas in Tal'Dorei where the four elemental planes begin to bleed with this realm. Since she was a little girl, she had quite a knack for air manipulation and beast shaping abilities. Well, if you consider kittens and flying squirrels to be little beasts...which, I do. Anyways, it wasn't long before the headmaster of the tribe, her father, Korrin, realized her true prodigious abilities and she was inveterated to succeed him as the next headmaster. Just like that, her jovial childhood was stripped and replaced with endless spell memorization, teachings from ancient traditions, and exceedingly high expectations. Every druid leader-to-be must embark on a journey to seek out the sister tribes in order to introduce and establish respect amongst the fellow headmasters. They call this the Aramente, or Noble Odyssey. When her father felt she was ready, he set her on the path to truly discovering herself, not knowing when, or if, she will ever return. As she hiked down the mountain towards Stilben, she meditated on the task ahead. Part of the Aramente is proving yourself a strong warrior, a valiant protector, and a wise and compassionate leader. With this knowledge, one thought plays in repeat in her mind: Is she even worthy?

TALIESIN: Percy was the third child of seven children, born to a noble family who lived far to the north in the ancient castle of Whitestone. With so many siblings to share the burdens of lordship, Percy turned his attention to the sciences, engineering, and naturalism. One day, a mysterious couple, named Lord and Lady Briarwood, came to court. During a feast held in their honor, the Briarwoods violently took control of the castle, killing or imprisoning everyone who would stand in their way. Percy awoke chained in the dungeon, only to be freed by his younger sister. Together they fled, chased by the Briarwoods' men. As they ran, Percy's sister took several arrows to the chest and fell. Percy kept running, eventually jumping into a freezing river and floating unconscious to freedom. He did not remember waking up on a fishing boat. He barely remembered the next two years, as he slowly made his way as far south as possible. Then one night, Percy had a dream: a roaring cloud of smoke offered him vengeance against those who destroyed his family. When he awoke, Percy began to design his first gun.

SAM: Oh, you haven't heard of Scanlan Shorthalt? Well, gird your loins, ladies, because he has his eye on you. A talented musician, master of disguise, and dashingly handsome in his own mind, Scanlan sings songs almost as much as he sings his own praises. Born a poor gnome, Scanlan used his endless charm and soaring tenor voice to croon for coin and support his single mother. One day, he was discovered by a half-orc promoter, and joined Dr. Dranzel's Spectacular Traveling Troupe where he learned the ways of the world, and honed his skills as a bard extraordinaire. A loner much of his life, Scanlan has never quite come to terms with the violent death of his mother at the hands of a goblin invasion. While his years on the road provided many, shall we say, educational experiences with the opposite sex, deep down Scanlan yearns for the one thing he's never known: the true love of a fellow gnome. Still, Scanlan considers himself a lover first, performer second, and fighter distant third. On the battlefield, he'll support his allies, but rarely draws blood, unless it's to protect fellow gnome, Pike. Count on Scanlan for a hearty laugh, a rollicking song, and a twinkle in his eye that melts hearts and makes the females swoon.

ORION: Greetings and salutations, I am Tiberius Stormwind. I hail from a town called Tyriex, located in the heart of Draconia. Born from a politically respected family, at the age of 15, I succeeded in passing the Sorcerer's Rite, showing prodigy-like control of my magic. The judges and the Draconian high council were amazed at how powerful my spells were for how long I had been training. At 20 years old, I was the youngest appointed member of the magic guild in Draconian history. For the next few years, I almost went mad from the malaise of being a guild member, as it's rather boring. However, one day I happened upon a chamber, unused for quite some time. In the room were stacks of books and maps of the surrounding cities and areas around the known world. For months, I would frequent the chamber, and learned of artifacts from legend. After a long period of research, I made a list of artifacts that caught my eye. I brought these findings to the high council and was told that all of the information in the chamber I had stumbled upon was either believed to be fiction, or unsolvable mysteries, and hence were lost forever. I found those answers to be unacceptable. A year later, I devised a ruse and managed to convince the city council to lend support in me leaving Draconia on a mission of peace and diplomacy for the surrounding kingdoms. Going from town to town and making friends and allies in and for the name of Draconia. Being a red dragonborn, I had quite the task on my hands in that respect, but it was exactly what I needed so I could explore the world and find these artifacts, as I felt the truth was out there. Some may describe me as buffoonish, but I say poppycock to all that. I am much sharper than most give me credit for. I just don't pay attention to things sometimes. I've also been known to be rather cunning, loyal, happy-go-lucky, and well, dangerous. I can't help but show my true scales every now and then. But overall, I think I'm quite friendly for a dragonborn.

LIAM: Never entirely welcome in the company of elves or men, Vax'ildan learned at a young age to skip past formality, preferring instead to invite himself in your door. Along with twin sister, Vex'ahlia, Vax was born by a chance encounter between elven royalty and human peasantry. Raised by their mother in their early years, the twins were eventually sent off to their father in the elven capital of Syngorn. But their cool reception among the elves there never warmed, and their time in the capital didn't last. The siblings stole away one autumn night and set out on the open road. After a few years of wandering, they eventually decided to return to their mother, and journeyed back to the lands of their youth. But instead of finding their childhood home, they returned to a pile of rubble. Their mother was gone, their home burned to ash. Pressing the townspeople for answers, they learned of the day the dragon came. With their ties all severed, Vax'ildan and his sister set out to find their fortune together in Tal'Dorei. An outsider since birth, Vax quickly learned to solve life's challenges in his own particular way, often by sidestepping them entirely. And when his knack for circumventing adversity isn't enough, the way of blades the elves schooled him in more than makes up the difference.

LAURA: Like so many half-elves, Vex'ahlia has spent most of her life suffering the cool reception of a people who don't fully accept her. Born of a human mother, and an elven father who only later in life took an interest in their existence, Vex'ahlia and her twin brother, Vax'ildan, quickly realized the only people they could truly rely on in this world were each other. It was at the age of ten when the two were taken from their mother, and brought to live in Syngorn, the isolated elven city for which their father was an ambassador. He quietly took them in, but always kept an icy distance, and after too many years of disdainful looks, the pair decided to leave his indifference behind, and set out on their own. Vax took to the cities, stealing small trinkets and learning the ways of the thief, while Vex kept to the woods. She preferred the isolation. Always the keen observer, she learned to hunt and to track, to spy and to shoot. Through a series of fateful events, earned herself a companion in the form of a bear– her own stolen Trinket – to fight alongside her and protect her fiercely. Also, he is adorable, and gives expert massages.


MATT: Hey guys, welcome back. To give you a little heads up, we are playing the 5th edition of Dungeons & Dragons. We recently converted over from Pathfinder, for those who play Pathfinder. One of our players was a gunslinger, for which there are no rules for in 5th edition. So I had to create and customize those for the game, so bear with us on that. That will be an interesting ride, regardless. We do have an eight-player game we've been playing for two years, which is a little crazy, which is why we go a little loose with the rules. It's a great group, it's a lot of fun. Not everyone can make every game, so we have enough players to definitely pull a party each time.

ZAC: Just so you know, we're having an audio bottleneck. It'll take about 30 seconds to work itself out.

MATT: Okay, audio bottleneck.

ZAC: Tech problems that make me want to murder someone.

MATT: That's okay. Just a second. You let us know when it's okay to talk.

TRAVIS: I don't know what that means, a bottleneck.

MATT: Are we all right? And how are we? Exterminate. Exterminate.

SAM: Nice. Audio isn't working they're going to watch something else. Thanks, douche.

(laughter)

MATT: Is the mic adjusted? Is it any better?

ZAC: Better now. We're good.

MATT: Well, great. Thank you guys. A couple of things transitioned from Pathfinder to 5th edition may be a little strange and fun. We have a lot of players, but they're great folks and most of that just means I have to work really hard to make sure the game keeps going, so that's on me. Ashley Johnson, unfortunately, cannot join us. She's our gnome cleric, Pike. She'll be here next week. Unfortunately, she's in London accepting a BAFTA, so I think we're okay. For the Last of Us. That's harsh. Also no donations this week, but going forward we will have donations available for those that will help partially run the show from our wonderful cameraman and crew. Also, half of our donations will go to the 826 charity. Marisha, if you want to talk a little about that.

MARISHA: Yes! 826LA is a charity that focuses on tutoring children in an after-school program and helping specifically with creativity, storytelling, art and general things that relate to Dungeons & Dragons. You should definitely check out the Time Travel Mart. There is one in Echo Park and one in Mar Vista. They have this amazing storefront where you can buy these awesome tchotchkes and things that go immediately to support the charity and the stream. It's awesome. It's 826LA, you should look it up. There's a few all over the country.

MATT: Yes. Also, as a heads up because I saw some of you guys ask me in the chatroom: These videos will be available on the Geek & Sundry YouTube Channel soon enough, as well as a more extensive backstory of the party. We'll have all that content ready for you so you don't have to memorize it. Maybe a bio page, I don't know. We'll figure something out. It'll be fine. Anyway, let's open that up. You know who I am. Matthew Mercer, voice actor and I've been running this game for two years. I'm a hardcore nerd. Let's go around the table and introduce our players so you can attach the faces to the intros you just saw. Let's start on this side with Travis.

TRAVIS: Oh! Hi. I'm Travis Willingham, voice actor, gamer. I play Grog the goliath barbarian.

LAURA: Hi. I'm Laura Bailey. I'm also, you know, a voice actor like everyone here.

TRAVIS: Yeah. I think we all are.

LAURA: I'm playing Vex'ahlia. The coolest chick ever.

MATT: The ranger with the bear.

LAURA: The ranger with the bear named Trinket, in case you didn't catch that. His name is Trinket and he's amazing.

LIAM: Hi, I'm Liam O'Brien. I'm playing Vax'ildan. This one's twin. We're half-elven twins. I started playing D&D when I was 13 and I can't believe this is happening. So cheers. Cheers to this.

TALIESIN: My name is Taliesin Jaffe. I'm a voice actor, director, and I've been playing some form of Dungeons & Dragons, and if you can't tell by my black clothing, a lot of Vampire the Masquerade when I was a teenager. There was a problem. I'm playing Percy, the Gunslinger. I'm the reason all the rules are all messed up.

MARISHA: I am Keyleth, the druid from the tribe of the Air Ashari. I am a half-elven person.

MATT: No, you're elven.

MARISHA: No, half-elf.

MATT: Half-elf. Okay.

MARISHA: Yeah, Come on, man. I've been half-elf since day one. Half-elven. Yes! You can see me shooting lightning and turning into awesome animals./

MATT: Orion.

ORION and MATT: Hi.

ORION (Cont'd): Hey, everybody. I'm Orion Acaba and I'm also a voice actor. I do things.

MARISHA: Oh, I'm Marisha Ray, by the way.

ORION: Yeah!

MARISHA: Did I say that?

ORION: Keyleth is Marisha Ray.

MATT: Let Orion have his moment. Don't try and break–

ORION: No, it's our moment.

MATT: There you go. All right.

ORION: I'm Tiberius the awesome sorcerer.

MATT: Dragonborn sorcerer.

ORION: Dragonborn, yeah! That's right.

SAM: I'm Sam Riegel: a voice actor, and stuff. My character is Scanlan Shorthalt. The gnome bard who sings a lot. Let's start playing, yeah?

(cheering)
Part I

MATT: All right! Let's jump on in. Thank you. Last we left off, to give you a little backstory. The party had completed a large venture in saving the nearby city of Emon. One of the central capitals of this human civilization of Tal'Dorei. They managed to halt a demonic insurrection within the throne and as such were greeted to a hero's celebration and had a keep built in their honor. Over the six month period of the keep being constructed, they went their own ways and then returned to see its final creation. However, they did not have a chance to really enjoy it immediately as one of their good friends and allies, Arcanist Allura Vysoren of the Tal'Dorei council came to them requesting their aid saying that a long time friend of hers, Lady Kima of Vord, who is a very well known and very well respected halfling paladin of Bahamut, the Platinum Dragon, had been gone on a pilgrimage for a while, essentially a vision quest that is part of her own development as a paladin. As part of this, she let the information go to Allura that a dark vision had come to her saying that some sort of evil root is beginning to breed beneath Kraghammer and the mountains within Kraghammer, which is the nearby dwarven civilization that you guys have previously not been allowed entry to because the dwarves weren't fans of nobody without any political means of entry. However, she managed to acquire the necessary documentation and offered you a very substantial reward should you find the whereabouts of Lady Kima of Vord and hopefully bring her back safely. You left on the pathway to the dwarven citadel of Kraghammer. You were ambushed by a group of roaming barbarian goliaths. Part way through the battle, Grog managed to recognize one of them as a previous ally and no longer an ally at this time.

TRAVIS: Son of a bitch.

MATT: Yep, the barbarian for his first and only time so far managed to avert battle through a social encounter and rolled pretty damn well on a persuasion check. So you got one. You get one. You got your one. Never again.

TRAVIS: Next time he dies.

MATT: Yeah. Essentially. Which managed to not turn it into complete bloodshed. You continued on your way to Kraghammer, presented your paperwork, were given entry into the city and that is where we begin this adventure.

LAURA: Oh no.

SAM: In the city of Kraghammer?

MATT: In the city of Kraghammer.

SAM: Wow! This is fantastic.

TRAVIS: We're in, right?

MARISHA: Yes. We were at the door. We were talking to someone right?

MATT: Yeah, you were talking to the front guards at the gate of Kraghammer. They have begrudgingly let you inside. Giving you a couple of pointers little prods and sent you into the city proper. You made your way through the darkened alleyways and stone carved tunnel that leads into the main, central portion of the city proper. An enormous underground metropolis sprawls out before you. The dark earth and shadows creating beautiful stone work, marble columns, archways, and labyrinthine bridges climbing across the vertical cityscape. All warmed with the red glow of some strange, crimson rock peppered throughout the town as a light source. A large metal forge envelops the center of this cylindrical city. The entire is a three-tiered cylindrical city that is built into the ground of the mountain itself. Welcome to Kraghammer!

LIAM: Remind us. Did we bullshit our way in here, or did–

LAURA: No, we had a way in.

MATT: No, Allura got your paperwork so you were actually able to get in this time.

LAURA: But, Ashley speaks Dwarvish. Pike speaks–

MATT: Pike speaks Dwarvish and she's not here.

ORION: I speak Dwarvish as well!

LAURA: Oh good!

ORION: I do.

SAM: That's fantastic.

MATT: The only other bit of information you have about the whereabouts of her is that she came here to go into the mine Apparently, a mithral mine where this evil is supposedly brewing. You heard that the one person who owns the biggest part of the mithral market here cornering, his name was the dwarven Lord Nostoc Greyspine. That was the only name you had in regards to this deep earth quarry.

SAM: Greyspine?

MATT: Greyspine, correct.

SAM: We have to go find him, don't we?

TALIESIN: I think before we do anything we should find a place to sleep.

ORION: That's true!

TRAVIS: Oh! We're all jacked up from before, right?

TALIESIN: Wouldn't it be nice to put everything down for a little while.

SAM: Of course. I've got a lot of booty that I need to stow.

ORION: Good way to phrase that, Scanlan. Also, I would like to check out any places where they might have enchanted libraries or what not.

SAM: Can you stick with us? You're the only one that speaks Dwarvish.

LIAM: Yes, you're getting ahead of yourself.

ORION: I'm just saying put it on the list.

LIAM: Let's look around. Are there any dwarves in the vicinity?

MATT: Oh, there are many! As you finish this conversation you look about there are two guards posted nearby wearing dark crimson and brass chest plates that have a uniform scar carved across the front. It's actually built into the armor itself as a design. They're both staring awkwardly at all of you arguing in the middle of this entry thoroughfare of Kraghammer.

LIAM: Tiberius, make with the dwarf-talk, please.

ORION: Hello, friends. My associates and I were looking for a place of lodging for the night and a place of reputable reputation.

MATT: One dwarf shouts over to another one, “You hear that, Jepson?! They're looking for a place to “stay.” “Aye, I heard that right. It's about time we had some new folk in town. Well, if you're 'looking for a place to stay' I'd say your best bet would be the Pig Pits.”

SAM: Is that the name of a place?

MATT: “Yes! Certainly! The Pig Pits.”

SAM: All right.

MATT: “Ask for the Pig Pits–”

LAURA: Those are actually pig pits, isn't it?

MARISHA: I feel like we're being hazed.

MATT: “What?! No! Not at all.”

TRAVIS: That sounds fine with me.

LIAM: This is Common?

MATT: This is all in Common, yeah.

SAM: Which way to the Pig Pits, sir?

MATT: “Pig Pits are that way.” He points over the edge and you see down past the central forge structure in the city to the very bottom nearby a large temple that envelops the bottom floor of Kraghammer proper there is indeed a distant slop of mud where internal livestock are being kept.

LAURA: I bring out a piece of gold. Please, sir, we're looking for a place to stay that isn't covered in mud.

MATT: “It's good to see that at least one of you speaks Dwarvish.” Takes the coin, kinks it in his teeth and goes, “All right, now if you're looking for a proper place to stay you're going to look for the Iron Hearth Tavern. That is to your left up that way no more than a half mile. Keep an eye out. Listen for the laughter and the people who are very drunk. That's your best bet.”

LAURA: Thank you, sir.

MATT: “No worries.”

LAURA: I like your armor by the way.

MATT: “Well, thank you kindly.”

TRAVIS: Was that a wink?

LAURA: It was.

LIAM: That's all she does.

LAURA: That's all I do is wink at people.

LIAM: It's a nervous tic, really.

MATT: It's a feat she took. You progress to the western side of the Kraghammer rotation as you curl around the central platform. Making your way eventually to the outside of this rather large, central tavern inn. As you walk in, you can hear music playing, you can hear laughter and boastful cheer, you can hear some arguments in the distance. You can hear it from a good two or three buildings away. This is definitely a central social environment here in Kraghammer. As you walk inside, you– Let me get some proper tavern music here for you.

SAM: Smells in here.

TRAVIS: Drinking territory.

MATT: You hear some loud boisterous (hearty dwarven laughter), some drinks being clinked together. As you walk in, the first thing that catches you is the scent of stale alcohol and smoked wood of some kind.

TRAVIS: Yes!

MATT: There are tables, most of them in decent condition, some of them half-broken and repaired, probably from some previous encounter in the bar. In the center of the room, there looks to be a not currently in use, specifically built brawling circle. It's about 30 feet by 20 feet. It's more of an oval. It's not in use, currently.

SAM: An octagon?

MATT: Essentially.

LIAM: How high is the ceiling here? Can Grog fit in here?

TRAVIS: Oh right, am I like–?

MATT: The ceiling actually is considered vaulted ceiling for dwarves so it runs at about seven feet. For Grog, it's uncomfortable, almost scratching your head across the top. As you enter, about seven or eight of the nearby dwarves at the front door go, (hearty laughter). They look immediately at the ragtag non-dwarven group that just stumbled into the center of the tavern.

TRAVIS: What're you looking at?

MATT: “It's not very often we get someone with that kind of a mug on you. Let me buy you a drink, come "sit down!”

TRAVIS: My kind of people, see you later! I go grab the drink with the lovely dwarves.

LAURA: We grab a table next to the dwarves with Grog.

MATT: Both tables next to the table they're at are completely filled with dwarves.

LIAM: I take a sack of gold out of my own pocket, slam it down on the table–

LAURA: A sack of gold, are you crazy?!

LIAM: Gentlemens and ladies. Ladies and gentlemen, we are traveling from far away. We just arrived from Emon. We are fascinated to see your underground city and to celebrate the occasion I would like to buy every dwarf in here a round. Bartender!

MATT: The music stops. The conversation stops. All dwarven eyes turn to the table and they all turn to a single dwarven woman in the back who's behind one of the bars, who has a towel over one arm. She's looking around, she's staring confused at you and all eyes are on her, and she goes, “Well, it's about time someone around here had some generosity! Certainly, pay upfront. Drinks all around on this half-elven gentleman.”

LIAM: Let it rain!

(cheering)

MARISHA: Make it rain.

TRAVIS: I would like a cask of ale.

LIAM: I'll need your largest bowl of ale for this one here.

TRAVIS: Cask. Cask of ale. Cask.

MATT: “No worries, Adra's got your back, be right back.” She wanders off to the back room, comes back and starts pouring stein after stein after stein of ale.

TRAVIS: Yeah. Keep going. Looks good.

MATT: You do notice she is definitely the head of this tavern and all of her barkeeps are male and seem to be worked rather ragged.

LAURA: What was her name?

SAM: Excuse me, miss. You.

MATT: “Adra. Yeah?”

SAM: I'm sorry?

MATT: “Adra.”

SAM: Adra! You run a fantastic establishment.

MATT: “That's right I do!”

SAM: Thank you for welcoming us and allowing us to buy this round.

MATT: “Of course. Patrons that come and drop coin like that are welcome any time.”

SAM: Well, thank you for your hospitality. Might we inquire about staying here the night? Do you have an inn with the establishment?

MATT: She reaches below and pulls out a big tome and starts thumbing through it. “You know, "actually we have openings right now on the second floor.”

SAM: Several rooms, or just one?

MATT: “Do you need them side by side?”

SAM: That would be nice.

MATT: “We could pull him there and push him into room seven.”

SAM: Something with a little bed for me.

MATT: “Giles!” One of the dwarf barmaiders comes over. “Aye?” “Get Stepheson out of his room, move him to the third floor. We have to open a block for our new guests.” “Ugh, fine.” The older dwarf stumbles his way up the stairs begrudgingly. “Right, so I can get a room for each of you. We're looking at eight rooms separately, that will run you per evening about 25 gold pieces. Does that sound about right?”

TRAVIS: Total?

MATT: “25 total pieces.”

SAM: Oh, okay.

LAURA: You want to share a room?

MARISHA: Yeah! We'll bunk up.

SAM: Grog, you and me. I can sleep on your feet.

LAURA: Probably like 15 gold then for just that amount.

MATT: She visibly deflates a little bit and is like, “All right, fair enough. Five rooms it is. 15 gold per room.”

SAM: We're penny pinchers.

MATT: “How long do you expect to stay?”

ORION: At least a few days.

SAM: I'd say a week.

TALIESIN: With an indefinite hold, we have business in the city.

MATT: “Right! Well how bout we pay the week in advance and I'll give you a discount?”

LAURA: What's the discount?

MARISHA: Wait. I thought we were going to be heading south?

MATT: “Let's say, 100 gold for the week, all five rooms.”

LIAM: We're pretty flush, I think we can handle it.

LAURA: Yes. That works.

TALIESIN: This doesn't terrify me.

LAURA: I think I did the math wrong.

TRAVIS: I was told there would be no math.

SAM: Sounds good!

LAURA: Gah! I hate not having a calculator! Fine!

MATT: “Ah! Great!” She pulls back and pulls some keys out and hands them to the rest of you. Hands you some paperwork, shows you which rooms are yours and says, “You're welcome to stay all you like, ask questions, hang about. Just make sure you don't do anything stupid near the Carvers.”

ORION: Ooh! Like what? I do things like that all the time!

LIAM: Sorry. Our Dwarvish is a little thick. Near the–?

MATT: “The Carvers, the Carvers!”

LAURA: The carvas. Of course.

MATT: “The Carvers!”

ORION: The Converse! Of course!

SAM: The Car Verse?

MATT: “Is this your first time in Kraghammer?”

ALL: Yes!

MATT: “The Carvers are the guard that run this city. They're the ones that keep the law.”

LAURA: The scar!

MATT: “Yes, the armor, the Carvers!”

TRAVIS: Yeah, what is with the scar? I've got one myself.

MATT: She leans back and as you reveal the rather gnarled scar on your chest. She reels back a bit and two of the nearby dwarves go, “Yeah!” They chug down their drinks.

TRAVIS: Yeah! More drinking!

MATT: They start showing their scars and are like, “Oh no! I got this one from an iron bolt!” They start talking about different creatures they fought. “All right. Well, the Carvers are a bit of a– how do I put it? A military class in this city. They run a very tight ship on the streets, so be careful.”

TALIESIN: That shouldn't be a problem. Mostly we are looking for Lord Greyspine, if I recall. We have business with him.

LAURA: We might have business with you, if you've seen a halfling come through.

MATT: She thinks to herself and goes, “There was a halfling woman, but she was staying at the "Firebrook Inn.”

LAURA: The Firebrook.

MATT: “The bottom floor, for a couple of weeks. There was talk about her. She got in a few fights herself. The one with the silver armor? That one? Yeah, she was a firebrand if ever I saw one. Right up my alley, I like that one.”

TALIESIN: How long ago would you say this was?

MATT: “Oh, she went through a few weeks. I haven't seen her recently.”

TALIESIN: Thank you. Perfect.

TRAVIS: Is there a champion of the circle of fighting in the tavern? Is there a reigning–

SAM: Already, Grog?!

TRAVIS: Well, I have to know these things!

TALIESIN: He has to do something.

MATT: She turns the barrel that she has on the table towards you a little bit and you can see the actual symbol, this burned image on the side that says, “Balgus Brewery.” She goes, “That'll be Balgus. The one that supplies us with what you're drinking. He's the undefeated champion. But I don't think he's quite right to fight at the moment.” She points towards the very edge of the bar and you see one older grizzled dwarf, long gray hair pulled into straight braids in the back, big bushy beard that's all shoved up into his face because he's asleep, drunk as a skunk, on the edge of the bar.

TRAVIS: My type of dwarf. Maybe we'll can use him as a merc later or something. All right, another time then.

SAM: Another time.

LIAM: Save it for a rainy day.

TRAVIS: Does it rain down here?

TALIESIN: I don't think they have rainy days.

MATT: “You said Greyspine?”

LAURA: Yes, Greyspine.

TALIESIN: We are looking to set up a meeting.

MATT: “Which Greyspine?”

SAM: Nostoc?

MATT: “Nostoc Greyspine. He's definitely a business type one.”

ORION: Well who's the friendlier Greypsine?

MATT: “The friendlier of the types would probably be the head of House Greyspine.”

MARISHA: Wait, how many Greyspines are there?

MATT: “Oh, well there's probably several at this point, I've lost track. The family line's been going for a while. However, of House Greyspine currently, Ironkeeper Gradim Greyspine is the head of this entire city. Voted in ten years ago, actually. He's head of the council.”

MARISHA: Ironkeeper what?

MATT: “Ironkeeper Gradim Greypsine. Gradim! You're– (sigh) These commoners. Learn to speak the language!”

ORION: I understood!

LIAM: Adra, may I ask, obviously we have no dwarves in our little party.

MATT: “Unfortunately.”

LAURA: Unfortunately for us.

LIAM: Sorry, about that. You're very welcoming. We appreciate that. How welcoming would you say the city is to outsiders? Would we stick out like a sore thumb?

MATT: “Probably. As long as you don't do anything stupid. As long as you keep the coin flowing, and as long as you stay to the upper levels. The lower levels you get to more of the business: the miners, the forges, the foundries. When you get to the business areas, that's where the guard gets heavier and that's where folks don't like you poking near their money.”

SAM: So the lower levels would have the mithral mines?

MATT: “The mithral mine, aye.”

SAM: There's one?

MATT: “There is one now. It's all been, and has been for quite some time, completely helmed up and run by House Greypsine. The Keystone Quarry is what you're looking for.”

LIAM: We're not really interested in that. We just want to see the city. Our business is elsewhere.

MATT: “Yeah, I would not recommend it. Not without proper business credentials on that. You'll end up being questioned very heavily.”

LIAM: Sounds like a dirty business, anyway.

LAURA: Right.

TRAVIS: Yeah, you want to stay away from those miners Scanlan, that's a dirty business.

MATT: She gives you a look almost like it was a slightly racist statement, but then passes it off because you paid her a lot of coin today.

MARISHA: So racist.

LAURA: So No-stock. Nostoc?

LIAM: Nostoc.

LAURA: Nostoc Greyspine.

MATT: “Yes.”

LAURA: You said that he's kind of a–?

MATT: “Oh, there's a reason he's the one put in charge of the mines and the businesses and the foundries.”

LAURA: Oh. Where is he located, exactly?

MATT: “Well, if he's not home at the actual Greyspine Manor– which is a sprawling house. It contains all the ones who live there.”

TRAVIS: We're going there!

MATT: “He's probably down at the actual–” What is it? Pardon. Bear with me. Consult my notes! “He's probably down by the Greyspine quarry itself, keeping an eye on the business there.” There's a nearby dwarf having a few drinks, goes, “Ah, Greyspine, there's been troubles round there! Apparently, a friend of mine works there. Got a big, nasty scar last week. Wouldn't even pay him for his time off to heal. It's bullshit!” He slams his drink down on the table.

SAM: Down at the quarry?

MATT: “Aye.”

MARISHA: How did your friend get this nasty cut?

MATT: “He works there! Said there was things pouring out of the caves. Goblins and the like!”

LAURA and SAM: Goblins?

MATT: “Ah, goblins are nothing.”

LAURA: Of course not.

MATT: “Seems there's something other than goblins poking out through this hole. Just saying, that business is in for a serious problem if it doesn't change.”

LAURA: Does your friend ever have drinks here? “No. He's been sober for two years. We're not friends anymore.” Tugs on his beard a little bit.

MARISHA: Oh. I'm sorry. I think.

SAM: A lot to process.

MATT: He pours another drink. At which point, Adra slaps his hand and says, “Pay that. He bought one round!” He finishes his drink and walks away.

ORION: Excuse me, one thing, Adra, are there any mystics in this particular town that study any arcane arts?

MATT: “Of course! What, you think dwarves are just the baseline folks who brawl each other?”

MARISHA: So many racist comments. Jeez!

MATT: “What you're looking for is House Thunderbrand. They are the ones who, by blood, have the arcane arts in their family line.”

ORION: Interesting.

MATT: “They run most of the enchantment process in the city, they also train– they call it train– some of us call it more 'indoctrination.' But, they're definitely the focus of all arcane arts here in Kraghammer.”

ORION: Thank you.

SAM: Thank you for your time, Adra. Carry on with your evening. We'll seek you out if we have any more questions.

MATT: “Certainly. Now if you don't mind,” She scoots you aside, and you see a line, a queue of dwarves behind her, with their empty cups, waiting to get to her to fill up the drinks that you bought.

MARISHA: Oh, that's– we did promise that.

LIAM: Enjoy, gentlemen! And lady.

LAURA: What time of day is it?

MATT: Best that you can tell, inside– you can't. You just arrived, probably around 3:00 or 4:00 in the afternoon, so you're probably pushing sunset right about now.

LAURA: Do dwarves carry the same schedule?

MARISHA: I don't know.

LAURA: Does anyone know?

TALIESIN: There's only one way to find out.

MATT: Make an intelligence check!

TRAVIS: Oh! Roll it! You're the first one.

LIAM: First die rolling. Nice!

LAURA: 18, plus, what is that? Investigation? Or insight?

MATT: This would be a straight intelligence roll on this one, so your general knowledge of dwarves.

LAURA: Oh. 20, then.

MATT: 20. That's not too bad! In your experience, you know dwarves, depending on their lifestyle and what they do for a living, their clocks can run differently, but for the most part, they run in tandem with most other races just because it makes it easier for dealing with outside forces. But, like I said, it's very variable. There is no set, locked time of: this is morning, this is evening, they just sleep when they need to and wake up when they need to.

LAURA: All right. Good to know.

MARISHA: It's like living in Alaska.

LAURA: Right!

MATT and MARISHA: Dwarven Alaska.

SAM: Yes, fellows, what should we do?

LAURA: Check out the Firebrook Inn, yes. That was where Lady Kima was staying. Also, I think somebody should run reconnaissance on Greyspine Manor.

TRAVIS: Like stealth, you mean?

LIAM: Yes. I don't think we should try to go directly to the mines and find Nostoc.

LAURA: No.

SAM: Agreed.

LIAM: No, I think maybe we should enlist the help of a dwarf here in the city to introduce us to Nostoc. I mean, we're not trying to raise hell, or bring down a thousand dwarves upon us.

TALIESIN: There's no sense attempting to be subtle.

SAM: Although, that does sound fun.

TALIESIN: Everyone's going to know that we're here, and what we're looking for by morning.

TRAVIS: Why don't we get old Drunky Greybeard that's got his face down on the bar to do it?

LAURA: Yeah, but he's very– Well, let's ask him. Maybe he's drunk enough to help us. Saddle up, Grog!

TRAVIS: Me?

LAURA: People seem to like you here.

TRAVIS: Yeah, but I'm really– oh, that's true.

LIAM: You're the connoisseur.

TRAVIS: Maybe I'll part my armor, so he can see the scar. Post up on the bar.

MARISHA: Take him a drink!

TRAVIS: All right.

LAURA: Yes, take him a drink. A very large drink.

TRAVIS: I would like to get the largest goblet you have of ale, and I would like to go over to, what was his name? Bulbous?

MATT: Balgus.

ALL: Balgus.

TRAVIS: I had it right.

MATT: Close.

TRAVIS: Balgus. I would like to–

SAM: I'm coming with Grog.

TRAVIS: Yes. I would like to go up and put my scar, and post up on the bar and (throat clearing)

MATT: (snores)

TRAVIS: (louder throat clearing)

SAM: I take out my flute and I play a little Healing Words spell and try to heal him of his drunkenness.

LAURA: Just a little of his drunkenness, not all of his drunkenness.

TRAVIS: He likes him drunk, so maybe like, half.

MATT: You play your tune, a beautiful little tune that saunters through the air.The magical energies emanate from the notes you make, drift into his torso; you can see a slight glow and he, “(grumbling) Where's that blasted music coming from?” His hand goes out and paws towards the flute.

SAM: Huh, I don't know where that was coming from.

TRAVIS: I'm sorry to disturb you, your name is of great repute around these parts.

MATT: He wipes a globule of drool that's crusted into his beard. “Aye, you've bothered me nap. What do you want from Balgus?”

TRAVIS: We were wondering if we might, perchance, acquire your knowledge about town, for a bit of a search.

LAURA: (whispered) Talk to him about fighting first.

TRAVIS: Right, I hear you're a good fighter. You look strong.

MATT: “I've heard the same.”

TRAVIS: Right. How often do you get challengers in this tavern?

MATT: “Not as often as I get woken up from my sleep. Which is never. Because only stupid people do that.”

LAURA: Lost cause. Abandon ship!

TRAVIS: Right. I have an intelligence of six, I know what I'm doing.

LAURA: Okay.

TRAVIS: There is a very pretty lady over there, with slightly pointy ears. (whispering) I'm

talking about you or you. (normal volume) There's two of them! They were actually wanting to ask you

a question if you wouldn't mind.

MATT: Make a persuasion roll.

TRAVIS: Me?!

SAM: Why is he doing this?

LAURA: Why would you throw this to us?

MARISHA: I know!

TRAVIS: Because I was either going to fight him or I was going to throw boobs at him, and I went with boobs.

MARISHA: He realized he was sinking.

MATT: That's level ten you get that, by the way. Throw Boobs.

LAURA: Persuasion. Oh! Good roll.

TRAVIS: Look at that: one. 19!

LAURA: Woo!

MATT: 19? He takes a moment, and grabs the drink that you prepared from his hand and goes (gulps).

TRAVIS: Nice form.

MATT: “You've got five minutes.” Then he stretches his back a bit. This gnarled hunch that he holds in his physical posture, flexes it a bit, and now you can see the rippling muscles that show beneath his tunic. This is a built dwarf. You don't know what past he's had, moving boulders or forging crazy iron shit, but there's a reason this guy has a reputation. He stands up off of his stool, which you can now hear crack with the weight of a dwarf, which are made for normal dwarves. This guy is solid muscle. He saunters over, looks about for a second, almost like he's looking for his next target. Sees the pointy ears, sees the pointy ears, and goes (sighs) and saunters up to the table, slams his hand down.

MARISHA: Why is he coming towards us?

TRAVIS: Because I told him to. Because you're supposed to ask him–

SAM: Boobs!

LIAM: Steady as she goes, ladies.

MATT: He sits down.

MARISHA: (whispered to Laura) You're better at this than I am.

MATT: “You called for Balgus, why?”

LAURA: Oh! Hello, Balgus.

MARISHA: Hi, Balgus.

LAURA: We just heard you're so impressive and masculine.

MARISHA: Yes!

LAURA: We really wanted to talk to you.

ORION: I use my Earring of Whisper to Vex. Cool it down.

LAURA: Oh sh– okay.

ORION: Calm down. Not so sexy.

MARISHA: I reach out and I stroke his bicep because I can't hear that.

MATT: Make a persuasion check.

ORION: Keyleth, stop doing that.

LIAM: I disagree, heat it up.

LAURA: Roll so good.

MARISHA: I'm really low in charisma. I'm really awkward. Persuasion.

MATT: Roll your persuasion.

TALIESIN: (groans)

LAURA: Oh no, what was it?

MARISHA: I rolled a two?

MATT: Plus?

MARISHA: Plus my persuasion of zero, because I have a shitty charisma.

MATT: As your arm reaches for his bicep–

MARISHA: I didn't say anything. I just touched him!

MATT: As your arm reaches for his bicep, his hand, belying his grumpy, half-asleep haze– with unnatural speed reaches out and slaps your hand to the side. Not painfully, but just, “No touching the drunk dwarf.”

LAURA: Sorry about my friend, Balgus. She's just so impressed with your muscles. We've heard amazing things about you here.

MATT: “Have you?”

LAURA: We have.

MATT: Tell me, what have you heard?”

LAURA: We've heard that no fighter can match your skill.

MATT: “You've heard correct.”

LAURA: We've heard that you know more about this town than anyone else.

MATT: “I've been around a bit, yeah.”

LAURA: Yeah. I bet nobody knows more about the Greyspines than you do and they've been around a long time.

MATT: “Political ass minds is what they are.”

SAM: Assmanes?

MATT: “Not keen to them– ass minds.”

MARISHA: Ass mines?

MATT: “They've got minds of an ass.”

MARISHA: Oh, I thought you meant like, mines that ex– Sorry. Go ahead. No, ass minds. Yes, they have ass minds.

MATT: “The Greyspines are no friend of mine. ”

LAURA: No, I've heard they're terrible. What do you do, Balgus?

MATT: “What do I do? I own the brewery in town!”

LAURA: (gasp) You do?

MATT: “The only one.”

LAURA: The best brewery?

MATT: “The only! Of course it's the best!” I've put everyone out of business. We export to most of Tal'Dorei.“

LAURA: This ale is amazing, that I'm drinking right now.

MATT: "Damn right it is!” You set it down and he takes it from your hand a little bit and takes a sip himself and sets it down again. (inhales deeply) (spits)

MARISHA: It seems that you aren't challenged often in business and in fighting.

ORION: I saunter over. Hello! My name is Tiberius Stormwind!

TRAVIS: We're all going to die.

MATT: He glances over and says, “Dragonborn. I haven't fought one of your kind in a long time.”

ORION: Oh! Who's the last dragonborn you fought? Do you remember his name?

MATT: “I recall his name was 'Broken and Bloody.'”

SAM: I think that's a friend of yours.

ORION: No, I know him! I know the Bloody family, they're terrible people. Anyway, my associates and I were wondering if you might come– Is that what we're doing? Trying to get him to come with us?

LAURA: Anyway!

SAM: We're trying to find out more about Greyspine. Where he might be or who his associates might be.

MARISHA: Gee, I'm so glad you came over.

ORION: Would you like to accompany us on this journey that we're taking? We're trying to find the Greyspines and you seem like you would want to come in on this.

TALIESIN: We think there might be something rotten in the mines.

MATT: Make a persuasion roll. You can assist if you like.

TALIESIN: I'm assisting in this persuasion roll, good god.

MATT: That just means he has advantage.

ORION: Oh, I get advantage?

TALIESIN: 21.

MATT: Yeah, so you get advantage on this roll.

SAM: So you roll twice.

MARISHA: What was the first thing you rolled?

ORION: Three. I'll take the 18.

MARISHA: Definitely take that 18.

ORION: Oh and plus my–

MARISHA: Persuasion.

MATT: He looks at you keenly, which–

ORION: Which is a nine.

LAURA: Whoa, you have a nine persuasion?!

ORION: That's why I talk.

MARISHA: He's pretty charismatic.

MATT: He goes, “Well no, I don't really want to go anywhere with you. But if you're looking to go ahead and talk to the Greyspines, you don't want to go empty-handed. It's customary to come with a gift of some kind.”

LAURA: Oh really?

SAM: What might they like?

MATT: “Well, let's just say, I have the finest brewery in the city.”

LAURA: Oh!

MATT: “I have some fine, very rare, very exotic drinks that I could, perchance, sell to you.”

LIAM: Pay the dwarf.

LAURA: How much for this exotic ale?

MATT: “How exotic you wanting?”

LAURA: We want to get in the door. We want him to like us.

MATT: “I can give you the finest of thistle branch, dark blood wine. This was crafted by myself, from a rare bloodthistle branch that I had brought over from the far-off city of Kamordah. This, I personally oversaw. It took me four years to fill this barrel full. It'll cost you 500 gold pieces. But it is a king's red wine!”

MARISHA: Can I do a persuasion check– a perception check to see if he's lying?

MATT: This would be insight. Go ahead and roll insight.

TALIESIN: I'm going to go walk over to Grog really quickly.

MARISHA: 27.

MATT: He seems too drunk to lie.

SAM: Let's just do it.

LAURA: Tell you what, Balgus. We have some very rare items with us that I think you might be interested in.

MATT: “Make it quick! You've got one minute.”

LAURA: We've got one minute? Well, we've got–

MATT: “My time is far worth the 500 gold you've already been talking about.”

LAURA: We've got this with us right now.

TRAVIS: We've got a bunch of dragon pieces.

ORION: Do you like dragon pieces?

TRAVIS: We've got 37 dragon teeth, one dragon eye, four cups of dragon blood–

LAURA: We've got this cup of dragon blood! Which I know can be added to ale or wine and makes it quite sensational.

MATT: He takes the sealed cup and sloshes it around in his hand. The actual liquid is coagulated to such a point that it's less of a blood and more of a gelatin. (sloshing sounds)

TRAVIS: It gets better with age.

LAURA: Exactly, a spoon of it!

MATT: He peeks it open and (sniffs). “Yes!”

LAURA: I think that's really expensive, actually.

MATT: “I can have this appraised, but if you want to do a straight trade for the barrel for this, I'll take you up on that.”

LAURA: Shit, no.

SAM: Just go for it.

LAURA: All right, fine! One cup of it.

MATT: “All right.” He takes the cup, puts it in a small satchel on his side. “Adra!” “Aye, what do you want, you drunken bastard?” “They've bought me thistle blood wine. Take it out back. Here's the key.” He tosses her the key. She grabs it and goes, “Really? Ooh, just walked in, they're buying fancy.” She comes back with two of her barmaiders who are begrudgingly carrying it with her. It's a nice barrel. It has a gold trim. The actual bands that hold the wood together is gold. The branding on the side is gold leafed into the wood. It's fine, exquisite, we're talking top shelf BevMo-style, awesome dwarven wine.

MARISHA: Top shelf at BevMo!

MATT: He pats it and he goes, “All yours. If this doesn't get you in the door, I'll eat my shoe.”

TRAVIS: Have you ever done that?

MATT: “Maybe, I forget a lot of nights.”

SAM: Where might that door be?

MATT: “Minute's up, you'll have to ask around, but it was great doing business with you.” He walks away from the table.

TRAVIS: I put it in the bag of holding.

MATT: It does not fit in the bag of holding.

LAURA and TRAVIS: What?!

MATT: The barrel is too big, you barely got Dork the ox in there. Which, for the record, they did fit a small ox in the bag of holding and then realized later on that there was no airflow.

TRAVIS: He came out!

TALIESIN: I feel like we weren't going to discuss that. I felt that that was in the past.

MATT: I felt that was a necessary story.

SAM: Maybe if we drank some of it, it would fit.

LAURA: The troll dick. Is that still in there or no?

TRAVIS: No, we actually got rid of the troll dick.

LAURA: Oh, okay.

TALIESIN: Did we trade the troll dick for something?

MARISHA: I thought we like used it as a weapon.

TRAVIS: I offered it up, but by that time it had turned into a slimy–

LAURA: Ew.

MARISHA: I thought we threw it at somebody.

LAURA: Can I stop Adra then and ask her where Greyspine Manor is? Keep, manor, whatever.

MATT: “Ah, well I can have him do it.” She pokes one of the barmaiders who turns around. This one's younger, he looks like he's frazzled and maybe new here or at least trying to make his way. He goes, “Okay, I can show you around, just follow me outside, come follow me.” He walks out. He's got a little apron on. He leads you guys outside. He brings you to the edge of the outer walkway of the central ring you're on. He points across the way and what you can see is a series of marble pillars that outline a residential district that opens and consumes the other side of the central ring of Kraghammer. He says, “If you go past far in that way, you'll look for the house of Greyspine. It's the one that has dark black marble with gold tinting inside the spiraling vein of the marble, it's gold. The gate outside is wrought iron, black iron, that's topped with a series of pikes and–” Pike awkwardly looks sickened, not understanding. “The real key point is, if you look on the front yard, you'll see a dwarven statue of the current Ironkeeper himself. That's where you'll want to go.”

SAM: Yes, very helpful, young man.

LAURA: Thank you so much.

MATT: “Of course. If you get the chance, you could fill out a little form saying how helpful I've been–”

SAM: Are there suggestion cards here?

MARISHA: Oh, absolutely.

MATT: “Here.” He pulls out a small parchment and hands it to you. It's handwritten with a couple of checkboxes.

ORION: You should give us all a copy so you will have multiple.

MATT: “I only have one.”

ORION: Oh, okay, that's fine.

MATT: “Sorry!”

SAM: Confidence needs improvement.

LAURA: Oh, it's okay, we have a wonderful writer.

TALIESIN: I'll rustle up a few. That's fine, why not. It's what I do, apparently.

MATT: He runs back into the tavern.

SAM: All right, shall we go to the manor?

LAURA: Do we want to do the manor right now? What time is it?

SAM: 5:00 or 6:00.

TRAVIS: We got to sleep.

LAURA: We might not want to bug him when he's, you know, having dinner.

TRAVIS: Let's be honest, that gate's going to jack us up. It's going to be full of trouble.

SAM: All right, yes, let's go sleep.

TRAVIS: Let's sleep.

LAURA: Well, it's only 6:00.

SAM: Well, then we have time to do other things.

ORION: How long is a short rest?

MATT: Short rest is around ten minutes or so.

ORION: I want to take short rest.

MATT: You've technically been short resting in the tavern. It's more of like a post battle– like, take a breather, bandage your wounds, settle yourself after a harrowing experience. That's what a short rest is.

ORION: What was the arcane magic, the manor?

MATT: Oh, what you're looking for is the House Thunderbrand.

ORION: I want to head in that direction.

MATT: Okay, so you're dividing from the party? Okay.

ORION: Oh, I'm going to House Thunderbrand, if anybody wants to come with me.

LAURA: What are you doing? I can't understand you with that popcorn in your mouth.

ORION: Sorry! I'm going to House Thunderbrand before turning in this evening. I've had a nice little short rest and I would like to ask them a few questions.

LAURA: All right.

TRAVIS: Yeah, go ahead, okay.

SAM: Is there any recon that's going to happen tonight?

LAURA: I think that you and I are going to go to Greyspine?

LIAM: We'll check out the house.

SAM: Do you need any help?

LIAM: Sure, you can come with us.

SAM: No, I don't want you to say yes.

LAURA: Then no, we'll stealth our way.

LIAM: Just a moment. Pike, you seem very distant. It's very strange, are you all right?

LAURA: Pike's not listening, she's looking at the chat room.

SAM: She's feeling ill. Does she need to lie down?

MATT: Pike is feeling, and for those of you who are curious in the chat room, once again, elements of this are house ruled, so don't complain.

LAURA: Oh, players.

MATT: We keep short rest to ten minutes because it makes it move faster. Pike is going along, she seems to be a little distracted, she can't quite understand. She says, “I don't know, I feel like I've been here before. It's hard to explain.”

TRAVIS: What?

MATT: “Anyway, I'm probably going to go rest for the evening.” She heads back to the tavern.

TRAVIS: The fuck does that mean?

SAM: We'll find out next week.

TRAVIS: But first, whores in the bedroom!

LAURA: Lovely.

SAM: Grog and I go in search of a, shall we say politely, whorehouse.

MATT: The polite term.

LIAM: Well, the cleric's away, the bard shall play.

TRAVIS: We need a massage. On my crotch.

LAURA: You and I stealth.

MATT: You guys make your way to the Greyspine Manor, you guys head for that, you head to Thunderbrand.

SAM: Is Grog going to find someone his size?

MARISHA: Percy and I spend some time making some really nice comment cards for–

TALIESIN: We're going to make some beautiful comment cards.

MARISHA: For what's his name?

MATT: His name is Balan.

ALL: Balan.

MARISHA: We're going to make some wonderful comment cards for Balan.

LIAM: Oh, Percy is wonderful with calligraphy; you've shown me.

TALIESIN: Yes, thank you.

MATT: Okay, so you'll get to that. You guys do manage to find what's called The Stone's Pillow.

TRAVIS: The Stone's Pillow?

MATT: The Stone's Pillow.

TRAVIS: I love it.

MATT: It's an establishment of comfort and ease, and will run you both for the evening, as you are not Kraghammer locals, 30 gold for the night each.

TRAVIS: A bargain.

SAM: We'll take it.

LAURA: 30 gold?!

SAM: What sort of ladies will we find there?

LAURA: Bearded ladies.

SAM: What species?

MATT: The madam of the house introduces you to a spectrum of ladies, mostly dwarven, and very attractive, you know. This is a nice establishment. There is one gnome. One female gnome. There are a number of male dwarves as well, that are standing at the ready. There is one elf, looks a little shy and embarrassed that a goliath walked in.

SAM: And that's our choice.

MATT: Those are your choices.

TRAVIS: I'll take the tallest one.

SAM: I'll take a dwarf.

MATT: Okay. You choose your lady, you take the tallest one which would probably be the elf. As you walk in, the shy elf turns around entirely. She is aggressive and throws you around. You got your money's worth. You get manhandled in a way that you haven't– You're going to be sore in the morning.

TRAVIS: Thank you!

MATT: Welcome to Kraghammer, gentlemen.

TRAVIS: I like it already.

MATT: All right, you guys.

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: Are you just walking up to the manor?

LAURA: No, we're going to try to check out what it looks like. See what the guards are like.

LIAM: Yeah, we'll pretend to take a stroll.

LAURA: Yes.

LIAM: Pose as a married couple.

LAURA: Ew, no.

LIAM: Just for the purposes of sneaking around the house.

LAURA: (retching)

LIAM: I want to see what the area's like.

LAURA: How about we pose as brother and sister, creepy?

(laughter)

LIAM: You come on to every human, orc, and half-elf in the entire kingdom, but pretending to be my wife for 30 minutes is too much.

LAURA: Yes. It's disgusting, so no.

LIAM: You're probably right.

MATT: She's got standards.

LIAM: Okay. So we'll take a stroll. Shop, see what the area's like.

MATT: You enter the residential district. It is dark and you see the red stone that permeates the area for a low gentle glow of the entire city is now clustered into these street lamps that are throughout the entire location. You begin to press into the residential district proper. There's some nice homes that are carved into the side of the rock, there's some stand-alone homes that are built out of fine stone. You eventually make your way towards the nicer part of it, where you start seeing some of the more marble buildings, some of the more exotic stonework being used in the construction of the homes. You also notice three of the guards that are part of the city establishment there are following you from behind, curiously. The Carvers.

LAURA: Oh shit, the Carvers. Shit.

MATT: No weapons drawn, but definitely hands at the ready.

LAURA and LIAM: Okay.

LIAM: Well, we could just keep walking.

LAURA: We could, but that could be bad.

LIAM: Yes. No, we just want to look at the house.

SAM: Louder!

LIAM: I mean we're not going to go sneaking in in the day.

LAURA: Let's say which ones are very obvious about being pretty, so we look like we're just sightseeing.

LIAM: Yes.

MATT: (chuckles darkly) As you continue to walk, eventually some of the dwarves approach.

LAURA: I point and say: Oh! Look at that one, with the carving, it's amazing!

LIAM: The architecture is divine.

LAURA: Divine!

SAM: (snorts) They're posing as the Howells?

LIAM: Lovey, would you look at this dwarven home?

MATT: (snobby voice) The marble texture on this is gorgeous. You get about 20 more feet before you get, “Hail! Hail!”

LAURA: Oh my! Yes? (giggles)

MATT: “You foreigners are wandering too far in districts you don't belong to. What's your business?”

LAURA: Oh I'm so sorry, I was just so amazed by the architecture here. I wanted to see the beautiful sculpture.

LIAM: We definitely are visitors here, sir, no one has explained the rules to your city. We were just taking in the fantastic architecture and history of Kraghammer.

LAURA: We were told there was a beautiful sculpture down the street of the ruler of Kraghammer?

MATT: Make a persuasion roll.

SAM: Oh jesus.

TRAVIS: Oh god.

MATT: Either of you, whichever you prefer.

SAM: If only I was there.

LAURA: 21.

MATT: All right.

TRAVIS: Wow! Pretty decent, good for you.

MATT: The guards look at each other. The one that was talking to you, you can see now, as he comes a little closer into the light, a frazzled black beard that's pulled into a very tight braid that goes down to his bellybutton. All wearing the same basic chest plate; long, black velvet cloak behind; each carrying some sort of heavy warhammer around the side of their belt. Steps up and says, “Well, just to tell you the rules here, if you're going to wander at night in a very expensive district, you don't want to do it by yourself because you either have chances of being mugged or arrested. We might have arrested you.”

LAURA: Oh no! I'm so sorry! Well, do we need protection?

MATT: One of them looks over and sees the bear that is off in the shadows nearby.

LAURA: I thought Trinket stayed behind. Cool, cool!

MATT: Trinket's quietly trying to keep up with his wonderful master.

LIAM: Come along Trinket, there there's nothing to be scared of.

MATT: “What's a bear doing in Kraghammer?!” They all grab out their warhammers.

LAURA: Oh no, please, he's quite harmless. In fact, he's very scared of most people.

LIAM: He's completely trained. He does tricks. Doesn't he do tricks?

LAURA: He does. Trinket show them your wonderful shake trick.

MATT: At which point Trinket, (subdued growling) just shakes his whole body. He looks at you, confused.

LAURA: That's good.

MATT: Then raises a paw up, and– (bear noises)

LAURA: If you put your hand out, he'll shake your hand.

MATT: (growling)

LAURA: Yeah, see!

MATT: The dwarves take a step back as the claw goes through the, “That's all right. I would say if that's your animal–”

LAURA: Yes?

MATT: “–don't bring it here.”

LAURA: Oh, good to know. Trinket, head back to that tavern, would you? People are getting nervous.

MATT: (growling)

LAURA: I love you.

MATT: Trinket begins to walk back. A couple of other dwarves that are wandering carrying some packages to the side make a very wide berth around this armored bear that's slowly moping its way through the streets of Kraghammer. What could possibly go wrong?

LAURA: He's so cute.

LIAM: He's a sweetheart, he's fine.

MATT: (growls) You hear in the distance. The one goes like, “Look, I'll show you to the statue and that's it, then you got to go.”

LAURA: All right. Thank you.

MATT: “I don't see many half-elves here and honestly I'm excited to meet you, so let's do this quickly. Come with me.” He leads you further into the cityscape. Down the road, you end up going through a few buildings. You find one large wrought iron fence with a series of carved spikes towards the top, and you see the beautiful dark marble building with the gold trim.

LAURA: Oh, this one's amazing.

MATT: “This is what you were talking about, Greyspine Manor. Lot of rich sons of bitches.”

LAURA: Wow, so you said the Greyspines own this one?

MATT: “Aye.”

LIAM: It's stunning. We only heard about the building itself; what can you tell us about the people who live here?

MATT: “Bunch of rich sons of bitches.”

LAURA: Well, we can tell that can't we?

MATT: “Actually, Ironkeeper's all right, he's been doing a great job. The rest of the family can suck off.”

LAURA: Oh, really?

LIAM: Not liked by the rest of the city, then?

MATT: “Oh, they have friends everywhere, but I personally don't like them. They run business pretty dark. They work most of their employees to the ground. To the bone.”

LAURA: Oh no!

MATT: “I don't think that's how you run a business. Well, that's how you run a business for profit, but not for–”

LAURA: Wow. It sounds like they would run the mithral mine which we've heard is so hard on its employees.

MATT: “Aye, that's the one.”

LAURA: Oh, really?

MATT: “Yeah. I don't know, I don't go that far south, doesn't interest me.

LIAM: Nor us.

MATT: "Smells like brimstone.”

LAURA: I don't blame you.

LIAM: We prefer the company of good hard working people, like yourself. We're very impressed with the work the Carvers do in this city, from what little we've seen so far, so hats off to you.

MATT: “I appreciate that. You know it's not easy. You're born into it. We spend most of our time training, which can get very boring.” You see that two of the dwarves that are now about two steps behind go, “(clears throat) All right, Thompson! We got to get back to our post!” “Oh, sorry. Look, we've dillied about too much. Just follow us back, go about your business, don't wander here at night, and good luck.”

LAURA: Thank you so much.

LIAM: Thank you. We follow for a couple of blocks, behind them for a bit.

LAURA: Make sure that they're paying attention to us.

MATT: Mm-hmm.

LIAM: Yes.

MATT: All right. They bring you back towards the entrance of the residential district.

LAURA: Then we stealth and–

LIAM: – split off, yes, we can split off.

MATT: All right, roll stealth, both of you guys.

SAM: Am I currently being beaten by a whore dwarf or anything?

MATT: Make a constitution check!

SAM: Constitution check?

TRAVIS: Hang strong, buddy!

ORION: That's a mouthful. 'Whore dwarf.'

SAM: 18!

MATT: Plus your constitution modifier. Actually, athletics! Go athletics!

SAM: Plus two! 20.

MATT: All right, that's a fine constitution check. You have impressed your female dwarf.

LIAM: Are you making a sex check?

SAM: Yes! I'm sex checking.

TALIESIN: Whore dwarf!

MATT: That happened. That's the first time.

SAM: (grunting)

LAURA: This is so uncomfortable.

MATT: So that happened. What'd you guys roll for stealth?

LIAM: 20.

LAURA: He rolled a 20, I rolled a 15.

TRAVIS: That's okay!

MATT: As you guys begin to wander off–

LAURA: No! They're professional Carvers.

MATT: – Vax, you vanish. Vex, you take a couple steps. You hear, “Hey, hey, hey! I told you, it's dangerous down there in the dark! Don't do that!”

LAURA: Of course!

MATT: “Where's your friend?”

LAURA: Oh, he already went back to the tavern that we're staying at. I was wondering if maybe you could show me around the rest of the town?

MATT: He looks to the other guards and they're obviously fed up with his flirting, and they're not too keen on you guys. “Well, you guys hold up post, I'll give her a quick walk around.”

LAURA: Thank you so much.

MATT: “All right, but I'm going to tell the boss!” “Fine! I don't get this chance very often!”

LIAM: I wave off from the alley that I snuck in to.

LAURA: Yeah, go do your shit.

LIAM: You do your shit, that you do! Then I head back through the shadows.

LAURA: Whoosh! Damn it!

MATT: You ask around, and it takes a while, especially since as a dragonborn some folks are like, “Oh, I'm not talking to you!” Some others are like, “Oh, yeah, right over that way!” It's a completely wrong direction, so it takes you a good two hours to eventually find your way to House Thunderbrand. When you get there, it's a beautiful alabaster building: large, white dome, with small spires built in to one of the more elevated ceilings of Kraghammer proper. On the outside, there is no gate, just an open lawn. You see grass, you see normally outside flora and fauna currently adorning the scape around this structure.

ORION: Whoa. Well, this is a lovely sight! I'm going to saunter on up to the door!

MATT: Nice! Go ahead and make a perception check.

ORION: Where is my perception–? Oh. Five.

MATT: Five? You saunter right up to the edge of the grass line, and get one step on what suddenly becomes visible to you: a rather subtly carved dwarven rune in the ground. In fact, there's a bunch of them, outlining the entirety of the grass. As your foot hits the rune, you're like, “Oh, that's a dwarven rune!” (stomping)

SAM: That's a good voice!

MATT: (as Tiberius) I've been practicing my Tiberius.

ORION: It's close.

MATT: Go ahead and roll a dexterity saving throw.

TRAVIS: Uh-oh. Saving throw?

LAURA: You got it, Tiberius!

ORION: What is this?

MARISHA: Dexterity.

ORION: Oh! That's a 15.

MATT: 15?

ORION: Mm-hmm.

MATT: You manage to pull back to lessen the impact, but a bolt of bluish energy bursts out from the rune in front of you, throwing you about three or four feet behind the rune. You catch yourself. You do suffer eight points of thunder damage.

ORION: Okay.

MARISHA: Damn gated communities.

SAM: This is why we go to brothels instead of sneaking around at night!

TRAVIS: Yep! No lightning attacks!

MATT: It's a whole different kind of damage you can suffer!

ORION: Okay. Well, I dust myself off. Apparently, there's some security. Hello?! Anything happen?

MATT: You wait about two or three minutes, no response.

ORION: Two to three minutes? That's a long time.

MATT: Yeah.

MARISHA: I have a feeling they're not going to respond to the crazy guy.

ORION: Very well.

TRAVIS: What're you two doing?

TALIESIN and MARISHA: We're making comment cards! Yes!

TALIESIN: You're all going to have comment cards that you are expected to fill out when you return back to the bar!

SAM: Hugely important!

MARISHA: Yes, because– what was it? Baldus, Beldus?

SAM: Balgus?

MARISHA: Balan! Balan was so nice!

MATT: There we go. Balgus and Balan.

ORION: What do I see around the place? Do I see any large rocks, or any large pillars that I can–?

MATT: Best from what you can tell at this distance, because it's fairly dark down here: the building itself has four corner spires around the large central dome structure. Each one of these spires is a very thin, tall, alabaster spire that at the very top is crested with some sort of bluish crystal that comes to a point. They're probably a good 35, 40 feet tall. About as tall as the rest of the structure is. You can't really tell how far back the structure goes because it meets with the back of the cave wall.

ORION: I'm going to– okay. I'm going to shoot a Fireball. Right in front of me, roll it like a bowling ball. Just right to the door.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: There's a baby right there.

MATT: You are four feet from the door.

ORION: Oh! I'm four feet from the door? I don't do that.

MATT: You can step back and do it.

ORION: I'm only four feet from the door? Oh.

MATT: It pushed you back four feet from the rune you stepped on. You're not at the door.

LAURA: Can I use that magical earring that we have?

LIAM: You don't know what's going on there!

SAM: Episode one. Tiberius kills himself.

MARISHA: Don't die! I should have come with you! Then I could–

TRAVIS: Bowl that Fireball, dude!

MATT: Tiberius Stormwind is a dragonborn sorcerer. Everyone is level nine currently in the game.

ORION: I use Mage Hand. I knock on the door.

MATT: From that far away? Okay, the arcane energy swirls up and forms this loosely hand-like appendage that drifts forward. As soon as it crosses over the rune where you stepped on, there is a spark of energy and the hand is dispelled.

ORION: Damn these runes. Okay, fine. I will do Glacial Blast right up to the door.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: But not to the door.

MARISHA: What?

SAM: You're alone.

MATT: Okay. You cast the Glacial Blast forward. The ice begins to congeal across the bottom of the floor. As it reaches the front of the rune, there is another spark of energy and the ice forms up against an invisible barrier that's there and then the ice that's up against the barrier melts extremely quickly, drifting into a puddle of water.

ORION: Shit. I turn back and head to the group.

MATT: Okay. As you turn around there are four Carvers that are hurrying towards you now, with their hammers out going, “You!”

ORION: What?!

MATT: They all surround you on all sides, you have a dwarf on each corner. “You have attacked one of the great dwarven families of Kraghammer! Name yourself and your business before you are under arrest.”

ORION: Don't speak to me in that manner, I am Tiberius Stormwind!

SAM: I am snoring after having sex.

MATT: Make intimidation check.

ORION: 18.

MATT: All four Carvers take a step back, look at each other. “Look, we're just doing our job. What's your business?”

ORION: I understand that, and I am sorry for losing my temper. I was just looking to ask questions of particular artifacts I have been looking for and this house is the only known arcane house I know that I was pointed to. I tried to reach them and communicate, but I was stopped by the stupid rune I can't figure out! I was turning back to get my tavern to get some rest and come back and try to contact the family the next day! Then I was stopped by you!

MATT: Make a persuasion check.

ORION: 24.

LIAM: I've just arrived to New York City, I'm going to smash the doors open.

MATT: The dwarf guards look at each other and one of them steps forward and this guy you can see now he has more carvings in his armor, he looks to have a little more rank than the other ones. He steps forward, ruddy brown beard, his eyes itself are pitch black. There is almost no color to the irises. He goes, “Look. I'm letting you off this once, but if you so much as spit in the direction of any other dwarf in the city, we're going to bury you so far underneath the dungeon you won't see the light of day 'til the day you rot, you hear me, dragonborn?”

ORION: I mean yes, my hearing is perfectly fine.

MATT: “Get on with you.” He puts his hammer back at his side. They all separate, stare you down as you walk past.

ORION: Good day. Back to the tavern.

MATT: Okay. You!

LIAM: Yes?

MATT: You make your way through the alleyways, eventually back towards the building proper. What would you like to do?

LIAM: Just going to watch, that's all. Do I see any security details? See who's guarding the place.

MATT: There are Carvers doing rounds around the city. On the streets wandering through in pairs, keeping watch. You don't see any particular guard outside, but you do see individuals moving past windows. There's a little bit of light from the inside of the buildings.

LIAM: No Carvers or any sort of guard detail outside the house? Anything like that?

MATT: Not between the gates. The yard area and to the front door.

LIAM: Okay. Heavily heavily guarded by the looks of what's inside and what's outside the gate?

MATT: What's outside the gate? You're hard pressed to find a moment where the street isn't visible to some Carver. This area is pretty well guarded. You figure largely because the person who is currently the Ironkeeper of the entire city of Kraghammer lives within that building as well as one of the more powerful dwarven families, so it's pretty well watched.

LIAM: Okay, I'm going to head back to the inn, then. I'm not going to poke the bear.

MATT: You all eventually gather back at the tavern.

SAM: (exhausted sigh) How was your night?

TRAVIS: That was wonderful, I don't know about you!

SAM: (singsong) I have hickies.

(laughter)

LIAM: Hickies? Is that a Gnomish STD?

SAM: Yes.

LAURA: Crazy! I have some hickies too, actually. What?

SAM: What?

TALIESIN: We have comment cards, so this will all work out well.

MARISHA: Yes! here! Here you go, here you go–

SAM: Success all around! Did you learn anything, Vex and Vax?

LIAM: I definitely think we should take the diplomacy route. The place is heavily guarded. There seem to be lots of Carvers.

MATT: There's a knock at the room that you guys are currently talking in.

LAURA: Yes?

MATT: Unless, are you in the tavern proper or have you gone back to– ?

LAURA: No, we're in a room.

SAM: I'll get it! (clears throat) Hello?

MATT: Adra's standing there looking a little nervous and she goes, “Hi, sorry to bother you. Is that bear one of yours?”

SAM: Oh!

LAURA: Yes! Trinket! Isn't he adorable?

MATT: “You might want to go,” You hear in the tavern: (aggravated growls)

LAURA: I'll be right back. I head downstairs.

MATT: You head downstairs and you can see all the dwarves are now gathered around the fighting ring in the center of the tavern.

LAURA: Oh no!

MATT: Trinket's now inside the ring with a couple other dwarves around, prodding and pushing it into the ring.

LAURA: No, no! No! No.

MATT: There's raucous cheering. They're not even listening to you at this point.

LAURA: Grog!

LIAM: I followed my sister downstairs.

TRAVIS: I come down too. It's party time!

MARISHA: I run down to with Grog.

MATT: Okay, as you guys head down, you can see now Balgus is now up and rubbing his chin. “Oh, never fought a bear before! (laughs)”

LAURA: No, Balgus! Fuck! Trinket, come here! Are we allowed to cuss? Trinket, come here!

MATT: You are very much allowed to cuss.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: Isn't that right, guys? Fuck yeah!

LAURA: No, no, and I run into the ring with him.

MATT: Okay, as you run into the ring a couple of the dwarves pat you on the back, you get a shove into the ring. It's now Trinket and you–

LAURA: Oh! I'll take on this bear!

(laughter)

SAM: What?!

TALIESIN: Well, all right!

MATT: Make a general charisma check.

TRAVIS: Do it! Fuck that bear up!

LIAM: I'm pushing my way through the crowd.

LAURA: Oh no!

MATT: What did you roll?

LIAM: A one.

MARISHA: Oh no!

MATT: Yes!

LIAM: First one of the series, everybody! First one!

MATT: As you rush and you guys are coming to the front, Balgus sees this and now you can see both eyes are open which means he's sobered up a bit, and he goes, “Oh no! This bear's mine. You want to fight two of us? Oh, it'll wake you right up!”

LAURA: Let's do it!

MATT: “Nothing as invigorating as a brawl!”

SAM: Are you going to fucking fight him?

MARISHA: I cast a fog. Over the ring.

MATT: Okay. As everyone is cheering up and getting ready, this very thick fog begins to fill the center of the bar area. You can now see a bunch of people are, “Wait, what the?!” Some are coughing. Some are like, “What the hell's going on? Fucking hell. Why is there–”

MARISHA: Okay, I run up in the fog, and I tap Trinket and I whisper in Trinket's ear and I say: Trinket, I'm tapping you out. And I turn into a bear like Trinket!

SAM: What?!

TRAVIS: Good!

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: Wait. First, I Polymorph Trinket into a squirrel.

LAURA: (gasp) You can do that?

MARISHA: I can. No, a mouse, like a rat.

LAURA: Little tiny.

MATT: Okay. You see the shadows nearby the fog you hear, “Come at me, I'm going to–” You can see Balgus's shadow swinging wildly at the air, angrily.

SAM: Are you going to fight him?

LAURA: I don't know!

MATT: You grab Trinket. Trinket shrinks down into a tiny little mouse.

MARISHA: I say: Scanlan! Catch Trinket!

SAM: Jesus, I don't like rats, but I'll keep it. Okay.

MATT: Trinket, the little mouse face, the moment you see it, looks very confused, very scared.

SAM: It's okay. I'll protect it. Don't worry.

MARISHA: Then I bear form up.

MATT: You (whoosh) into a bear form. Now Keyleth is now this giant bear where Trinket once was.

TRAVIS: I got my money on Ballsack!

SAM: Don't bet against the enemy!

LIAM: In the fog I somersault over some random dwarf and pull out my dagger, but turn it around in my hand and whack Balgus in the back of the head as hard as I can, just to try and knock him out.

LAURA: Can you see in fog?

SAM: He's a really good fighter.

LIAM: Low light.

MATT: Go ahead and make a stealth check.

LAURA: What?!

MATT: You have advantage because you are in fog.

ORION: I'm at the balcony by the way. Watching all this.

LAURA: You have advantage, roll twice.

LIAM: Oh, thank you.

TRAVIS: Yeah, we're watching what they're doing.

SAM: Remember, he's our friend. We don't want to kill him.

ORION: I'm taking a short rest, you all can do this.

LIAM: 21.

MATT: Okay. Balgus's drunken, mist covered state does not seem to notice your approach. He is swinging wildly, though. He has disadvantaged attack on you as you approach. One of his fists swings past you. That is going to be a 12, I don't think that hits.

LIAM: No.

MATT: You just narrowly dodge out of the way. You can feel the fist just whoosh past one of your

ears. As you come back up, clutching the base of your dagger, go for your strike.

LAURA: Oh my gosh!

TRAVIS: Come on taint butter, you got it.

LIAM: Oh, that's no good. Oh, I have advantage on the attack roll for this?

MATT: Because he does not see you, yes. You are currently stealthed.

LIAM: That's much better. 26!

TRAVIS: That'll work.

MATT: That'll hit. Go ahead and roll sneak attack damage on this, of course.

LIAM: Plus regular?

MATT: Yeah.

SAM: Don't kill him!

MATT: Well, we're considering it nonlethal damage because it's with the base of the dagger.

ORION: I'm having an ale while watching all this.

MATT: You're watching a lot of fog, with some shapes moving in it.

ORION: Yeah, and I'm like: This is fog! Probably Keyleth's spell.

LAURA: I'm blindly looking for Trinket.

SAM: Trinket's in my hands.

MATT: You're like, “Where's Trinket?” You see a giant bear there and you're like, “There's Trinket! That's not Trinket. There's no armor.”

MARISHA: Oh, that's right.

MATT: You're very confused. Trinket now has no armor, is a slightly different shade–

MARISHA: No, he's close enough! Man, come on, I've been around Trinket enough.

ORION and MARISHA: Come on, man!

LIAM: 27, right in the base of his skull.

SAM: Jesus.

MATT: Crack! A resounding impact hits and there now dwarves that are like, “Yeah! Ooh!” All the cheering stops and there's this lull. Quiet hits. Balgus hasn't moved, by the way. You impact and it's like hitting a wall. There's this taut, thick stump of muscle where the dwarf neck is.

LIAM: Fuck!

MATT: As you pull back the dagger, his hand reaches up and grabs your wrist. His head slowly turns towards you and he goes, (laughs)

LIAM: Bonus action to disengage. Disengage as a rogue.

MATT: Well he's going to attempt to grapple you.

LAURA and LIAM: Oh no.

MATT: Go ahead and make an acrobatics check; it's probably your best score anyway.

LIAM: All right. Oh, that's fine! That's a 30.

MATT: That's a 30?

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: You manage to just slip out of his grip. Barely. He was about to clamp on. As you step away, he turns towards you and goes, “Oh, well I feel alive tonight! Bring it, all of you! I want to smash a face in.” He's got a little bit of ale froth at the corner of his mouth. It's beginning to drip into his beard. It's quite an awful sight for those that are close enough to see it. The rest of you just see this, shapes and movement. There's still this, “Okay, what's going on?” kind of a feel. You hear Adra in the back going, “Stop this! This is– I can't even see! What are you doing?! Don't destroy another table!” She's frantically trying to stop this chaos. There's now a bear– what are you doing, Keyleth?

MARISHA: I'm a bear and–

MATT: You're a bear.

ORION: (like Marisha) I'm a bear.

MARISHA: What happened?

MATT: You're a bear, you want to do anything?

LAURA: What are you doing?

MATT: You see the shape of Balgus like– in the middle of this fight ring.

LAURA: Do some tricks! Do some tricks! Start clapping and, like, dancing around.

MARISHA: Okay, that's a good idea.

MATT: This is what she tells you.

MARISHA: I see her as my trainer.

LAURA: Dance!

MARISHA: I'm like (growling). I'm circus bear-ing.

LAURA: Everyone! Gather round and watch the amazing Trinket do his tricks!

SAM: I start playing music from my shawm instrument. Which exists.

MATT: Yeah, it does.

SAM: A rousing jaunty bear-like tune.

LAURA: Yes!

ORION: I'm going to cast Prestidigitation and do fireworks on top of that.

MARISHA: You should give me a fez! Can you Prestidigitation me a fez?

ORION: Can I do little hats?

MATT: You haven't done a fez yet. You need to work on that. A couple more levels.

ORION: No. I'll try. Paper hat!

MATT: Have you ever seen fireworks go off in a cloud? You get that little boof, boof. There's a bunch of that above you. Cloud, lights flashing. You begin singing your tune. Do you give an inspiration dice to her?

SAM: Sure, I would love to give her an inspiration dice.

MATT: A d8 inspiration dice from the bard as you hear the enchanting, jaunty, bear dancing theme.

SAM: (singing) Oh, look over there! It's a bear! Yeah!

MATT: Bard getting his bard on. Go ahead and make a performance check.

SAM: Who, me?

MATT: No, she does. You're performing as a bear!

MARISHA: Natural 20!

(cheering)

MATT: Do you want to add performance dice?

LIAM: Look at that, a fucking bear dance.

MATT: I'm sorry, the inspiration dice that he gave you.

SAM: No! It's a natural 20!

MARISHA: It's a natural 20!

MATT: I know. Okay!

MARISHA: No, I want to save it! I'm inspired, for later. I will think back to that moment.

MATT: You were so inspired, you weren't even inspired to be inspired for this.

MARISHA: Yeah.

MATT: This array of strange puffy fireworks in the fog; you doing this little rotation. You actually manage to do a bear cartwheel, and slam into the ring, but it looks pretty cool. You get back up. You're on your hind legs, you dance on one foot for a second. Balgus is like, (raucous laughter). He starts laughing, doubles over, clutching his stomach, laughing his ass off. Other dwarves start laughing too. The music gets louder and the band in the back of the tavern begins playing again. There's now this general jovial air restored to the tavern.

LAURA: I grab an empty cup off of the table and say: Tips for the bear, right here!

SAM: We're going to get money for this?

TRAVIS: Of course.

LIAM: I beeline to the bar and say: A large mug of ale, please. As soon as it's ready, bring it right over to Balgus.

MATT: You guys are pulling through a crowd, covered in mist still. You're having a hard time finding your way through the bar. The people are at least now cheering, in the mood. There's still some people trying to find their way to the front to see what's going because they hear the music and they hear the cheering. “Well, what's going on over there?” They're pushing their way through. You make your way to the bar. You see Adra's really nervous, like, (panicked sounds)

LIAM: I can fix this!

MATT: “How? Do! Go!”

LIAM: Quickly?

MATT: “Here, go!” She hands you one, doesn't even charge you for it.

MARISHA: I'm still dancing!

LIAM: Looking for Balgus in the crowd.

MATT: He's still in the center of the ring. No one's still getting near Balgus. They're cheering off to the side. Balgus is laughing. “Ooh, growl for me! Do a happy growl!”

MARISHA: (growls)

MATT: “Yeah, there's a happy growl! Oh, it's been so long since I've been outside!” A little tear on the edge of his face. As you approach up his side–

LIAM: Arm around his shoulder.

MATT: Immediately, instinctively, he slaps it off his arm and turns around.

LIAM: Take this! You are an impressive specimen, my good man. I have never had a fight that amazing in at least a week. That was something to see. Here, take this, and after this one there's three more.

MATT: He's drunk, you're offering him ale, and he's been laughing at a bear for two minutes. Make a persuasion roll with advantage.

LIAM: Yeah! Persuasion, you say? 15.

MATT: Two rolls, yeah, you have advantage.

LIAM: Oh! 15.

MATT: 15! He looks at you with this big grin, and you can now see his gnarled, yellow dwarven teeth, this railroad of terror that his mouth is. This big smile. He reaches out, his beard poofing over the side, grabs it and goes, “See, now this is dwarven hospitality!” He lifts his drink up and it spills a little bit on his arm. He's like, “Hey!” Everyone lifts up and cheers again.

(cheering)

MATT: Everyone still keeps drinking through the fog. It's like a bad sauna in here right now. Everyone's fighting their way through. At which point now, Balgus slaps you on the shoulder, takes a drink, and wanders out of the fight ring, goes and finds a table to sit down and begin chugging what you gave him.

SAM: Why don't we adjourn for the evening? Retire to our rooms?

TRAVIS: Why don't you go change out of bear form?

MARISHA: Yeah, and I guess I can let Trinket change out of mouse form.

SAM: Why don't you wait until we're upstairs?

LAURA: Can I take the mouse? Can I take Trinket?

SAM: Here, rat-mouse-thing.

LAURA: Okay, hi, Trinket! Oh, is his armor teeny tiny too?

MARISHA: Oh, does he have a tiny armor mouse? Mouse armor!

MATT: If you choose, while polymorphing him, you could make it as a visual aesthetic. Because it was a quick impact, I would say it looks like a normal mouse right now. Sorry. Next time!

LAURA: Well you're still adorable little– don't poke him.

MATT: (squeaks)

LAURA: I stick him in my little pocket.

LIAM: I grab a half a mug of ale off the table and say, “Dwarven compatriots, we could not have expected a better welcome here in Kraghammer! We'll see you tomorrow night for round two. Thank you, one and all.”

ALL: Huzzah!

MATT: (cheering) Balgus goes, “Three more! You said three more!” You see his empty cup on the table.

TRAVIS: We did say three more.

LAURA: I laugh and hustle her over and say: One, two, three, put them in a row for this gentleman right here.

MATT: “Aye! (whispers) Thanks.” She gives you like a really earnest like, “Thank you.” You now have a very good idea of how a good third of the tables in this tavern are repaired.

TRAVIS: He's tough.

MATT: You guys head back up to the rooms.

TRAVIS: You put some stank on him.

MATT: Yeah, that was like a (vibrating) when you got the impact on him.

LAURA: Don't fight him, you guys.

SAM: Oh, Grog's going to fight him at some point.

MATT: I get the feeling that's probably going to go down at some point.

TRAVIS: He's going to be playmates with me.

LIAM: It's just a misunderstanding. I'm sure he's a lovely gentleman.

MATT: You guys are heading back up to the room. Which, it's not a hallway built for a bear. Your shoulders are squeezing through.

LAURA: How big is the room?

MATT: Well, each one of your rooms comfortably fits two people, maybe. Like, one and a half?

LAURA: Oh no. What will I do with Trinket?

MATT: If you help push Trinket through the door. Thankfully, dwarves are fairly wide folk, so the doors are built for stouter folk, they're just not very tall. You, actually, have to bend through, Grog, to get into your room. On the bed that you lie on, your legs dangle a good two feet off the bottom, at maximum. You can push Trinket through with a one, two, three! Or you can carry her through as a mouse, and then have her stuck in there.

MARISHA: Yeah.

LIAM: That's all right. Neither of us need a blanket now.

LAURA: Well.

MARISHA: How long can I keep her a mouse?

LAURA: Him! Trinket's a boy, all of you, please.

MARISHA: Up to an hour?

MATT: I believe it is, yeah, concentration.

TRAVIS: I mean, are there like stables?

LAURA: You know, yeah. Can I go downstairs and ask about stables? Maybe he can stay in the stables.

MATT: You have to talk to Adra. She's like, “There's no stables in this establishment, but we do have a downstairs storage area your bear can probably stay in.”

TRAVIS: Yeah, he's a bear, he's fine.

LAURA: Trinket, is that okay?

TRAVIS: (as Trinket) Yeah, I'm fine.

LAURA: All right, yeah, he's seems to think it's all right. Let's go with the storage room. If there's anything that looks edible, you can eat it. It's fine.

MATT: “That's not true.”

LAURA: Just kidding!

MATT: “I'll charge you later.”

MATT: You bring Trinket back down. Do you release your polymorph?

MARISHA: Yeah.

MATT: Trinket becomes a bear again. I'd say the room's probably a good 40 feet by 30 feet.

LAURA: Oh, so he's fine.

MATT: Half of it's filled with barrels and crates, and storage of dried foods. Trinket comes in and (sniffing) and starts rummaging into one of the half open sacks of dried meat. That's going to be put on your bill.

LAURA: Shit.

MATT: You head back to your rooms for the evening to rest.

MARISHA: Take a nap.

MATT: Anything you guys want to do in preparation for the next day?

SAM: No, let's get it on.

MARISHA: Oh, we should give our comment cards to Balgus.

TALIESIN: I think we should all turn in our comment cards.

LAURA: Oh, our comments cards, that's right.

MATT: You turn in your comment cards for Balan.

MARISHA: Balan.

TALIESIN: I can't stress how important this is.

LIAM: Maybe we should– go ahead, I'm sorry.

TALIESIN: No, no, really, no it's fine, speak over me, I don't care.

MARISHA: Here, take him the extras.

TALIESIN: We're going to give him a few extras so he can have more comments.

MARISHA: Yes.

SAM: You guys are so kind with these comment cards.

LIAM: Perhaps we should all go to bed, and the humans back in North Hollywood should take a pee break. At some point.

SAM: The humans?

LIAM: You. You, and you and you and you and me.

MATT: Yes, indeed. Do you want to take a quick restroom break for the folks here?

SAM: You okay?

MATT: Zac?

ZAC: What's that?

MATT: Folks here might want to use the restroom real fast.

ZAC: You want me to play the intro videos again?

MATT: You know what, go ahead and play some of the intro videos and we'll come back here in a minute to continue the game, while everyone rests, and empties their bladders. We'll be right back guys. Hang tight.

SAM: Commercial break.
Break

TRAVIS: Right, listen up! If you have ale, then you have a friend in Grog Strongjaw! A goliath of towering height and size, this barbarian has an appetite for the two great loves in his life: combat, women, and ale!

[record scratch] Wait.

TRAVIS (CONT'D): Easily the brains of the group, Grog is often consulted for his vast knowledge of shapes, colors, and shiny things! Also ale. In his early years, armed with his two-handed greataxe, Grog often enjoyed proving his might amongst the ranks of his family's wandering herd. But after coming upon an unsuspecting elderly gnome in the woods, he objected to the killing of such an innocent life. A creature of impulse, Grog felt only pity for this– well, this terrified little thing. And his disobedience cost him dearly. Beaten bloody, and banished by the herd leader, his Uncle Kevdak, Grog was abandoned and left to die. Exiled from his herd, it was then that the relative of the very gnome he fought to save, saved him. It was the kindness of a gnome cleric named Pike that healed Grog, bringing him back from death's edge. And they have remained close friends ever since. Most nights, Grog can be found challenging entire taverns to wrestling matches! Or accompanying Scanlan to the nearest house where you pay for lady favors. Also ale!

MARISHA: A first impression of Keyleth would leave you with little information on the half-elven druid. You might even think that her social awkwardness due to her sheltered upbringing is kind of sweet. Of course, it would be unwise underestimate her based on first impressions.

[thunder crack]

MARISHA (Cont'd): Under that un-intimidating petite frame is a vicious beast waiting to be unleashed, whose natural powers have made even the fiercest of champions pee their pants, literally! Born to the Air Tribe of the Ashari people, Keyleth was raised with a deep love of nature and the elemental magics. It is her people's inherent duty to protect the delicate areas in Tal'Dorei where the four elemental planes begin to bleed with this realm. Since she was a little girl, she had quite a knack for air manipulation and beast shaping abilities. Well, if you consider kittens and flying squirrels to be little beasts...which, I do. Anyways, it wasn't long before the headmaster of the tribe, her father, Korrin, realized her true prodigious abilities and she was inveterated to succeed him as the next headmaster. Just like that, her jovial childhood was stripped and replaced with endless spell memorization, teachings from ancient traditions, and exceedingly high expectations. Every druid leader-to-be must embark on a journey to seek out the sister tribes in order to introduce and establish respect amongst the fellow headmasters. They call this the Aramente, or Noble Odyssey. When her father felt she was ready, he set her on the path to truly discovering herself, not knowing when, or if, she will ever return. As she hiked down the mountain towards Stilben, she meditated on the task ahead. Part of the Aramente is proving yourself a strong warrior, a valiant protector, and a wise and compassionate leader. With this knowledge, one thought plays in repeat in her mind: Is she even worthy?

TALIESIN: Percy was the third child of seven children, born to a noble family who lived far to the north in the ancient castle of Whitestone. With so many siblings to share the burdens of lordship, Percy turned his attention to the sciences, engineering, and naturalism. One day, a mysterious couple, named Lord and Lady Briarwood, came to court. During a feast held in their honor, the Briarwoods violently took control of the castle, killing or imprisoning everyone who would stand in their way. Percy awoke chained in the dungeon, only to be freed by his younger sister. Together they fled, chased by the Briarwoods' men. As they ran, Percy's sister took several arrows to the chest and fell. Percy kept running, eventually jumping into a freezing river and floating unconscious to freedom. He did not remember waking up on a fishing boat. He barely remembered the next two years, as he slowly made his way as far south as possible. Then one night, Percy had a dream: a roaring cloud of smoke offered him vengeance against those who destroyed his family. When he awoke, Percy began to design his first gun.

SAM: Oh, you haven't heard of Scanlan Shorthalt? Well, gird your loins, ladies, because he has his eye on you. A talented musician, master of disguise, and dashingly handsome in his own mind, Scanlan sings songs almost as much as he sings his own praises. Born a poor gnome, Scanlan used his endless charm and soaring tenor voice to croon for coin and support his single mother. One day, he was discovered by a half-orc promoter, and joined Dr. Dranzel's Spectacular Traveling Troupe where he learned the ways of the world, and honed his skills as a bard extraordinaire. A loner much of his life, Scanlan has never quite come to terms with the violent death of his mother at the hands of a goblin invasion. While his years on the road provided many, shall we say, educational experiences with the opposite sex, deep down Scanlan yearns for the one thing he's never known: the true love of a fellow gnome. Still, Scanlan considers himself a lover first, performer second, and fighter distant third. On the battlefield, he'll support his allies, but rarely draws blood, unless it's to protect fellow gnome, Pike. Count on Scanlan for a hearty laugh, a rollicking song, and a twinkle in his eye that melts hearts and makes the females swoon.

ORION: Greetings and salutations, I am Tiberius Stormwind. I hail from a town called Tyriex, located in the heart of Draconia. Born from a politically respected family, at the age of 15, I succeeded in passing the Sorcerer's Rite, showing prodigy-like control of my magic. The judges and the Draconian high council were amazed at how powerful my spells were for how long I had been training. At 20 years old, I was the youngest appointed member of the magic guild in Draconian history. For the next few years, I almost went mad from the malaise of being a guild member, as it's rather boring. However, one day I happened upon a chamber, unused for quite some time. In the room were stacks of books and maps of the surrounding cities and areas around the known world. For months, I would frequent the chamber, and learned of artifacts from legend. After a long period of research, I made a list of artifacts that caught my eye. I brought these findings to the high council and was told that all of the information in the chamber I had stumbled upon was either believed to be fiction, or unsolvable mysteries, and hence were lost forever. I found those answers to be unacceptable. A year later, I devised a ruse and managed to convince the city council to lend support in me leaving Draconia on a mission of peace and diplomacy for the surrounding kingdoms. Going from town to town and making friends and allies in and for the name of Draconia. Being a red dragonborn, I had quite the task on my hands in that respect, but it was exactly what I needed so I could explore the world and find these artifacts, as I felt the truth was out there. Some may describe me as buffoonish, but I say poppycock to all that. I am much sharper than most give me credit for. I just don't pay attention to things sometimes. I've also been known to be rather cunning, loyal, happy-go-lucky, and well, dangerous. I can't help but show my true scales every now and then. But overall, I think I'm quite friendly for a dragonborn.

LIAM: Never entirely welcome in the company of elves or men, Vax'ildan learned at a young age to skip past formality, preferring instead to invite himself in your door. Along with twin sister, Vex'ahlia, Vax was born by a chance encounter between elven royalty and human peasantry. Raised by their mother in their early years, the twins were eventually sent off to their father in the elven capital of Syngorn. But their cool reception among the elves there never warmed, and their time in the capital didn't last. The siblings stole away one autumn night and set out on the open road. After a few years of wandering, they eventually decided to return to their mother, and journeyed back to the lands of their youth. But instead of finding their childhood home, they returned to a pile of rubble. Their mother was gone, their home burned to ash. Pressing the townspeople for answers, they learned of the day the dragon came. With their ties all severed, Vax'ildan and his sister set out to find their fortune together in Tal'Dorei. An outsider since birth, Vax quickly learned to solve life's challenges in his own particular way, often by sidestepping them entirely. And when his knack for circumventing adversity isn't enough, the way of blades the elves schooled him in more than makes up the difference.

LAURA: Like so many half-elves, Vex'ahlia has spent most of her life suffering the cool reception of a people who don't fully accept her. Born of a human mother, and an elven father who only later in life took an interest in their existence, Vex'ahlia and her twin brother, Vax'ildan, quickly realized the only people they could truly rely on in this world were each other. It was at the age of ten when the two were taken from their mother, and brought to live in Syngorn, the isolated elven city for which their father was an ambassador. He quietly took them in, but always kept an icy distance, and after too many years of disdainful looks, the pair decided to leave his indifference behind, and set out on their own. Vax took to the cities, stealing small trinkets and learning the ways of the thief, while Vex kept to the woods. She preferred the isolation. Always the keen observer, she learned to hunt and to track, to spy and to shoot. Through a series of fateful events, earned herself a companion in the form of a bear– her own stolen Trinket – to fight alongside her and protect her fiercely. Also, he is adorable, and gives expert massages.
Part II

MATT: Hello, everyone. Welcome back. We've had our pee breaks. We've had our refills of our drinks. We've got Fireball, so I think we're good for the next venture. Anyway, the party has taken their rest for the evening. Once again, this is one of those weird experiences where you wake up, not because of the sun rising, because you can't see it in the dwarven city of Kraghammer, but eventually you all come to consciousness naturally. What is your plan of action?

SAM: Oh, Jesus, we should have all talked about this while we were all peeing.

TRAVIS: We're going to beat up everybody, right?

SAM: Are we going to the manor?

TALIESIN: I say we have brunch, and we go to the manor–

LAURA and TRAVIS: Brunch?

SAM: Eggs benedict.

TALIESIN: I want dwarven brunch.

LIAM: I want a traditional dwarven breakfast.

MARISHA: Dwarven eggs are very good.

TALIESIN: They're small.

MATT: Okay, so Tiberius fills you all in about his experience, trying to get into the House Thunderbrand.

TRAVIS: How you almost got killed?

ORION: I didn't, certainly not. I just couldn't get in the door. Rather rude!

MARISHA: Why did you think that after the magic hand failed that the big thunder ice wave would work?

ORION: What I thought is that I could cover the rune with ice and merely step over it. I didn't think it would dissolve my ice.

TRAVIS: Did you sleep?

ORION: Yes.

TRAVIS: Oh. I had to make sure, you know.

ORION: A good sorcerer always all his tricks before turning around, which is what I did. I think we should go back there because I feel that it's significant that I couldn't get in so easily.

TALIESIN: We will go back there. I don't think it's the next order of business but I think that we're not leaving the city without dealing with that.

LAURA: Definitely.

TRAVIS: Do we need to do something with the comment cards?

LAURA: Oh.

TALIESIN: Did you not fill out your comment card?

TRAVIS: No, I did! I know, like, three letters, so like A, F, and A.

MARISHA: That's okay.

TALIESIN: That sounds very positive.

MARISHA: It's the thought that counts, Grog. It's the thought that counts.

LAURA: Did you put a smiley face next to the A-F-A?

TRAVIS: I covered my hand in ink.

LAURA: That works.

TALIESIN: Very good. I think that went well.

SAM: Shall we try to make our way to the manor, then?

LAURA: The Greyspine Manor, with our cask of fancy ale/wine.

TRAVIS: Does the light ever change being underground?

MATT: No, it is a perpetual low red glow from all the stones that are embedded around the streets.

LAURA: I feel really sleepy and also very awake at the same time.

MARISHA: Yeah, I know.

MATT: Oh, dwarves.

LAURA: So what do you think?

TALIESIN: Now I'm curious if there's dwarven coffee.

MATT: You guys make your way after your brunch, your delicious dwarven brunch–

TALIESIN: Thank you!

MATT: – which is very alcoholic.

TRAVIS: Yes!

TALIESIN: It's like being in New Orleans for the weekend, every meal is going to come with something alcoholic.

LAURA: You're turning yourself into a dwarf?

SAM: Did you catch that? He just turned himself into a dwarf.

TRAVIS: You did?

MATT: Tiberius went (whoosh) into a dwarven form.

LAURA: What kind of dwarf? What do you look like?

SAM: He's very handsome for a dwarf.

LAURA: Are you a girl dwarf?

MARISHA: Yes! You should be a lady dwarf.

SAM: Oh yeah, what kind of dwarf? A lady dwarf?

ORION: I would not do that again.

TRAVIS: Oh, you did do that, you did take it as a troll.

ORION: Almost! She shot off the penis.

LIAM: What is going on?

TRAVIS: That's where the troll dick came from.

ORION: Don't you remember, Vax? I was almost raped by trolls.

MATT: There was a cavern interaction with two male trolls that they had stealthed up behind as a party. I love explaining this to the audience. Tiberius then polymorphed into a female troll to try and Bugs Bunny them, not realizing that dwarves who are underground and–

LAURA: Trolls.

MATT: –trolls don't encounter female trolls often enough to have a one track mind. He nearly got himself in a very bad situation. That was remedied by the party attacking and Vex over here shooting off the troll's dick. Which then went in the bag of holding, which is disgusting.

MARISHA: That's also where the hashtag not all trolls came from.

MATT: Yup, hashtag not all trolls came from that game. That is horrible.

TALIESIN: Oh god. Bring it back.

MARISHA: Bringing it back.

MATT: You guys make your way to the residential district. The same guards are there who were there the previous night that encountered you guys so, as you roll up with an entourage-

SAM: How many are there?

MATT: Currently, there are four.

TRAVIS: We can take them.

LAURA: Hi. I wave at Thompson.

MATT: He's actually not there. It's the two others that were with you. He is noticeably absent.

LAURA: Oh. Where's Thompson?

MATT: They look at each other and they're like, “He's been given the day off.”

LAURA: Oh, really?

LIAM: As you can see, we brought one of your citizens with us to show us a tour of the city.

SAM: That's you.

MATT: “Citizen? I haven't see you about. What's your name?”

ORION: Oh, my name is Tiberius Kraghammer.

(laughter)

SAM: Like Johnny New York.

ORION: Shoot, we're in Kraghammer, right?

SAM: We're in Kraghammer.

ORION: Oh, Stronghammer.

SAM: Johnny New York.

MATT: “What is it, Kraghammer, or what was it?”

(laughter)

ORION: I meant–I meant Stronghammer. Kraghammer is my father's cousin's side.

MATT: “How drunk are you?”

ORION: I've been drinking since I've woken.

MATT: Make a persuasion check.

SAM: See, he is one of you!

TRAVIS: I had a lot of breakfast.

ORION: Oh yay, 19.

MATT: 19.

TRAVIS: Tiberius Kraghammer.

MATT: “All right, I haven't seen you around, but obviously it's a bit early to be that fucked up.”

ORION: I've been very depressed, you know.

MATT: Well, what's your business, if I might ask again? You already seen the statue.

LAURA: Yeah, we saw the statue, but we wanted to get a better look at it. We brought this gift for the Greyspines and we wanted to present it to them.

MATT: The two new Carvers step forward and look at it. “Ooh!”

LAURA: It's really nice.

MATT: One of them's like, “I'll tell you what. If you let us taste a bit of that, we'll let you go.”

ORION: Oh, I mean, I've been drinking a lot of it, sure!

LAURA: A thimble of it because if any of it goes missing– Is it sealed? Can we tell if it's sealed?

MATT: You look at it. It does not have any sort of port or exit on it. It is just a solid barrel.

ORION: Maybe, we can save some for them.

LAURA:. If we open it, it'll ruin the barrel, right?

MATT: “Ah, that's right.”

LAURA: Maybe we can save you a bottle of it when we open it inside. We'll give it to you later.

MATT: Make a persuasion check for that. It's a very persuasion based encounter.

LAURA: Should I roll that one that failed me earlier or my little dice?

MATT: The little dice! They haven't come out yet!

LAURA: (high-pitched) My little, tiny dice.

MATT: Itty bitty dice.

LAURA: Teeny tiny dice. Okay that's better, I rolled a 23.

MATT: Okay. They all look at each other. “If you can save enough for all four of us, please do. Bring it back, we'll be looking forward to it.”

ORION: Do you have any flasks that we could use to fill them up?

LAURA: We've got some bottles, don't worry.

MATT: “We'll be waiting. If you don't show with the drink, we'll go right to our supervisor.” They all nod.

LAURA: Yeah, keep nodding. Here's the thing. I don't know if I can save four bottles worth, but I'll save as much as I can.

SAM and TALIESIN: Just say yes.

LAURA: Hey, I've got it covered.

LIAM: On our father's good name, we will bring you some of this. That is a promise.

TRAVIS: It's a good name.

MATT: They all look about each other. “Fine. Remember, we're waiting.” They all lick their lips a little. They part and let you guys into the residential district. You make your way to the very back. You can see House Greyspine. Once again, guys, for those who haven't been there before, it's a beautiful arrangement. The iron gate around it with spikes on the top. You can see the entire front yard, it's about a good 80 yard walk to the front of the building itself. It's a quite a distance from the front gate and that entire area is filled with like a stone garden with various small sculptures and interesting knick knacks they collected and put on display like as a small museum as you approach the front of House Greyspine. You get to the front door as a large double oak door about ten feet tall, four feet wide, currently closed. There is no handle on the door.

TRAVIS: No handle?

MATT: No.

ORION: Hold on, wait. Don't knock on anything. Things shock you here.

SAM: Let's go knock on the door.

TALIESIN: I want to double check, see if there's a bell to ring or there seems to be some sort of calling–

MATT: Easily enough, you see next to the door there is a small chain that protrudes from the stone wall. It has a small bulbous ball at the end.

TALIESIN: Ding ding. Ding-a-ding.

MATT: You pull it. Not a ding, but a large (clanging). It is a heavier chain than you expected. As you pull on it, you feel a large hammer-like object is slamming into a brass-type material as it echoes and resounds in the building. Definitely announcing your presence.

MARISHA: Percy, can I try?

TALIESIN: If you must, yes.

MARISHA: Okay!

MATT: Boosh! It echoes into the house.

MARISHA: I just wanted to do that once! I'm sorry.

SAM: Should we ding-dong-ditch?

(laughter)

LIAM: Scanlan perhaps a little ditty on strings will ease our introduction.

SAM: I'll start singing a little jaunty welcoming song. (singing) Hello, hello, we're here to pay you calling. Hello, hello I don't know what rhymes with calling.

TALIESIN: “Calling,” at the very least. I thought you would go right there.

SAM: Yes, it's true.

MATT: All right, are you going to play the music for the sake of playing music?

SAM: Yes, for now.

MATT: All right. About ten seconds pass before the door– you hear a large (thudding) and one of the doors opens up. You see a dwarf, with long gray hair that's slicked back and pulled into a ponytail. A very small trimmed beard, very proper, steps out in long black robes and goes, “Can I help you?”

TRAVIS: Percy?

TALIESIN: Yes, Percival Fredrickstein von Musel Klossowski de Rolo III.

ORION: You can call him Percy.

TALIESIN: You can simply call me Percy, thank you. We're here to discuss some business with Lord Greyspine and we have, of course, brought gifts and our charming company.

LIAM: As well as our dwarven compatriot to introduce us.

ORION: Yes, who? I am quite drunk right now.

MATT: He gives you an awkward look. It's like a look of trying to place your face. “Which lord are you looking for?”

LAURA: Actually Nostoc.

ORION: Is he the nice one? I would like the nice one.

MATT: “Nostoc, I'm afraid, is currently working at the quarry, if he's who you're looking for.”

LAURA: Oh, of course he is.

SAM: If Gradon is here, is that his name? Gradon?

MATT: He gives you this look. “Gradem is not taking visitors.”

LAURA: Of course not.

TALIESIN: That's a shame, we brought this half-barrel of ale right here and some–

SAM: And some very, very attractive mining contracts, but if there's no one here to talk about them–

MATT: He gives you this look. “If you're talking mining contracts you want to head to the quarry and talk to, Lord–” Looking him up again in my notes. “You want to talk to Nostoc Greyspine. He's the one who runs the quarry. As far as the Ironkeeper himself– I mean no offense, but only official political business.”

TALIESIN: Well, this is definitely official political business. I will also say, could you direct us to the quarry? We are new in town.

MATT: “Obviously. Have you not shown them where the quarry is, friend?”

ORION: I have no idea what's going even going on.

SAM: Jesus.

TALIESIN: He's been drinking since very early this morning.

MARISHA: He's on vacation. You'll have to excuse him.

ORION: I must say, I am having a wonderful time.

MARISHA: You know, friends are in town, he's showing us around.

TALIESIN: What was your name, again?

MATT: The dwarf gives you a subtle look, goes, “My name is Magrim. I am the servant of the Ironkeeper himself.”

TALIESIN: Magrim, of course you're the servant. You are filled with poise and sophistication, and of course, above all, protocol. I would not wish you to break protocol which is why some simple directions, for those of us who are wishing to do some official business. You'll be right on your way and your house will return to order.

MATT: “Right. The Ironkeeper is not open to business outside of pre-approved political understanding.”

LAURA: Of course.

MATT: “If you don't have a pre-approved meeting put within our ledger, you won't be seen.”

LAURA: Of course not, but for the mining contracts, however, wouldn't we need to speak to Nostoc? Is there any way– I hear it's very hard to get down into the mines. It's very well-guarded, right? That's why we came to speak to him here.

MATT: He leans over and looks at the cask of ale and says, “Down to the mines, you have to go to one of the chain platform posts at the edge of town that will bring you to the base area. Find your way to the mines there. That should be enough to get Nostoc's attention. The rest is up to you.”

LAURA: Lovely. Thank you so much.

SAM: One moment, before we adjourn– (whispers) Do we want to try to get into this place, or are we just going to go to the mines?

LAURA: (whispers) Maybe we should talk to Nostoc first.

SAM: And ditch this place?

TALIESIN: Every time we break into someone's house it turns out poorly.

LAURA: We're trying to get to the mines, essentially.

LIAM: I think he's still listening.

TALIESIN: Good man, good day. We'll be on our way, thank you.

LAURA: Magrim, you've been wonderful. Thank you so much. We plan on keeping some of this ale and bringing it back to the household. Would you like some when we open the cask?

MATT: He looks down at the cask, looks up at you and says, “I would not turn down a sip or two.”

LAURA: Lovely. We'll be sure to save you a small bottle.

SAM: I'm going to turn invisible.

MATT: As he's looking over there, you vanish. All right.

LAURA: You can do that?!

SAM: And I'm sneaking into the house.

LIAM: To what end?!

TRAVIS: That's awesome! Who cares? Light it up!

SAM: I don't know why!

TRAVIS: He's gone nuts!

TALIESIN: We are off the reservation.

MATT: “Is that all your business?”

LAURA: I believe it is all of our business.

MATT: “Well, good day.” He steps back into the doorway and closes the large oak doors. You are now standing in the foyer of Palace Greyspine. A luxurious foyer, the floor itself is a fine dark velvet red carpet. There are tapestries across the walls and small wooden end tables set at the edges of the hallway, this foyer area that contains sculptures and vases and plants that exist underground specifically. There's a large stairway that leads up into the upper portion of the house and two doors at each side that lead to rooms you no longer can see.

ORION: I use the earpiece and whisper: What are you doing, Scanlan?! What are you doing?!

SAM: I don't know! Give me 20 minutes!

LAURA: 20 minutes, that's okay! Let's all step away from the house.

MARISHA: Ask if he needs assistance or divergent–

TALIESIN: Divergent?

MARISHA: Divergent.

MATT: Magrim wipes his hands and walks away going, “(sigh) Fucking foreigners.”

SAM: I follow him where he's going.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: My nervousness, I let out a little bit of a fart as we–

MATT: Make a stealth check.

ORION: Why are you making it harder on yourself?

SAM: 14 plus I'm invisible, plus two. 16.

MATT: Because you're invisible, I'll give you advantage on that. Go ahead and roll.

SAM: Oh, well. 14. Plus two. 16.

MATT: As you scamper by, behind Magrim, following him towards the kitchen area of the abode, Magrim stops and turns, rubs his stomach, goes (groaning) and continues walking forward, seemingly unperturbed by the sound.

SAM: I'm snooping around, trying to see if there's any lords or higher ranking individuals in the area.

MATT: Okay, I'll say within the time that you have within the house, you wander through quite a few rooms. There's a wonderful music room, which contains a number of dwarven instruments that you've read of and many instruments that you know as well. You actually find another, what do you call it again? A shawm?

SAM: Shawm.

MATT: A shawm. You find another shawm within, more finely crafted than the one that you have.

SAM: Oh fuck.

MATT: A gift of lords, if you will.

SAM: I'm so tempted, but no.

LAURA: Does he have an earring on? Does he have one of our earrings?

LIAM: We all do.

MATT: Not everyone, you only made a few.

SAM: Just me and him.

LAURA: Who all has an earring?

SAM: He can talk to me, apparently.

LAURA: Tiberius, tell him to look for paperwork of something. For the mines!

ORION: Scanlan, look for paperwork of something else, and by the way, all of you should be hearing me right now, you all have the ear–

LAURA: Not everyone. You only made like five or something.

MATT: You could only afford five.

ORION: That's right. (clears throat) Do all those things, Scanlan.

SAM: Great.

TRAVIS: Who's talking right now?

MATT: As you look about the household, you also come across a couple of bed chambers that are locked, pretty hefty lock.

SAM: Not going to try.

MATT: Okay. You make your way up the stairway, and there's a long hall that leads to, essentially, a throne room that is still partially under construction, mostly finished. It actually was an intentional build onto this house. House Greyspine, when the current Ironkeeper went into office, it seems, began to have this room built. It's nearly finished, but it's an extravagant room with a large stone and dark metal throne, steps lead up to it, and its raised dais-like pedestal in the center of the room. A series of great magically glowing and flickering lanterns across them. There are two dwarves inside that are currently finishing up the stone work. They're doing various sorts of masonry and plastering in areas and carving out and chiselling out pieces of stone, and making them intricately carved in this flavor. Other than that the room is currently empty.

SAM: Shit. There's nothing to steal!

TRAVIS: Drop a deuce in the bedroom!

MATT: Hashtag “gnomishdeuce.”

ORION: Damn it, Scanlan! Just get out of there! What are you doing?

LAURA: You totally should!

TRAVIS and LAURA: An invisible poo!

SAM: I might as well try one of the doors that's locked, and see if I can pick it, but I'm not good at that, so I'll try.

MATT: Okay. Do you have on your person any sort of thieves' tools?

SAM: I have a forgery kit, a poisoner's kit–

MARISHA: Forge some thieves' tools real quick.

SAM: Climbing gear? And a whip.

LIAM: Matt, I have one of the earrings, and I say: Scanlan, what exactly is the purpose for this little escapade, and will it be ending shortly?

SAM: Can I reply?

MATT: You can, through the message-based ear enchantment.

SAM: Just trust me that I have no idea what I'm doing.

MATT: Do you wish to pick one of the doors?

TRAVIS: Do it.

SAM: Yeah, I'm going to try one!

MATT: Okay, you have disadvantage on this.

SAM: Of course I do.

MATT: So roll twice, and we'll consider this a straight dexterity check.

SAM: 11, plus zero?

MATT: You futz with the door for a good minute, trying to bend a piece of wire you had, thinking to forge some tumblers, and eventually get to a point where you hear, (tink). And it broke.

SAM: I can't do two spells at once, so I will give it up and I'll make my way to the door.

MATT: Okay. The door is currently closed.

SAM: I become un-invisible and I cast Dimension Door.

MATT: All right. You blink through this small, purplish arcane doorway. It brings you directly outside. You guys are waiting, Scanlan just pops into view.

SAM: It was crazy in there! People were farting everywhere! It was not me. They're building a throne room, there were some locked doors. Man, I wish you could have been there! It was exciting, but ultimately pointless. Let's go down to the mines!

LIAM: I would like to stress again that none of these dwarves are our enemies, at all. We just want to go have some words with Greyspine.

TRAVIS: That we do not have our healer, at present.

LIAM: Well, we do, but she's very distracted, and is not feeling herself.

SAM: She wanted to stay at the inn this morning.

LIAM: She's feeling awfully BAFTA today, so.

SAM: Let's make our way to the mines, shall we?

ORION: Metal poisoning, yes.

TRAVIS: To the mines, then, yeah.

LIAM: Let's go get this drunk dwarf!

MATT: Yes, the bard was doing a lockpick with no lockpicks. He was fashioning it from wire. Exciting but pointless! You make your way to the edge of the center ring. You find that there are long spiral staircases that move to the bottom, where there are elevators that bring you to the bottom floor. The elevators are chain based, like a ratchet-type system with two Carvers there, of course. You approach one, eventually you talk with them, they lead you down there, but once again they give you a look of, “Watch your back!”

LAURA: We point at the ale and give him a thumbs up!

MATT: They nod, and let you pass. As you continue downward into the lower area, you can see the red stone that lets a lot of the atmospheric glow of Kraghammer is used less and less and a lot more central torches are now in place; sconces. The stone itself is either rarer the further down you go or has less of an illuminating power the deeper into the earth. You eventually reach into the center part of town. You now see from where you're standing a number of large structures in the very center of the bottom part of the city of Kraghammer. You can see– There is a giant domed temple that is made of gold and bronze in the center. It looks almost like a gargantuan gazebo that has doorways on each side that is currently closed off. No guards at it, though. You do see a number of other buildings. There is a large, heavy foundry far off to the left of you that has a little bit of smoke that's coming off of it, but most of it looks to be filtered into a giant, metallic funnel that is then placed into the rock. Almost like all the smoke based exhaust is being funneled outside of the mountain. That is the closest; that's the foundry. Then to the right of you, you wander a bit and you can begin to see that part of the mountainside to the far right has that look of a strip mine, or like a large portion of the minerals has been pulled away and is currently being mined further. That looks like probably one of the better places to look in looking for the Greyspine Quarry. You eventually make your way to the outside of the quarry. You now look down into three large pits that descend deeply into the side of the mountain. This mine has been going for quite some time and a large chunk of this looks like it may be being prepped; almost like the mine is what's growing Kraghammer. The more they mine into the mountain, the more they fill the mined area with further city construction. It's this self perpetuating cycle of expanding the city downward. Currently in the quarry, there are a number of large stone dwarven buildings in the edge of it, one of which is the largest of them all, looks like it's made more of a black and red, iron aesthetic; some of it's been oxidized a little bit and has that rough and tumble, iron feel. That one has the most guards around the base of it. The Carvers are gathered entirely around it. Looking down into the center of the quarry, towards the bottom there are a number of tunnels that lead into the hillside of Cliffkeep Mountains proper, surrounding Kraghammer.

TRAVIS: Let's go where the guards are.

LAURA: Let's walk towards the guards.

LIAM: Let's just do this directly, I think.

SAM: Just swords out.

MARISHA: Wait. Before we go up, I take the cask of ale and I grow some pretty flowers on it, and I make a nice pretty bow and I shine it up a little.

TALIESIN: You're making a fruit basket?

MARISHA: No, I'm just– it looks attractive now.

TALIESIN: It looks like a fruit basket.

MARISHA: It does not look like a fruit basket. It's not that ostentatious.

TALIESIN: It's the “Ale of the Month” Club.

LIAM: In her defense, they probably don't see flowers too often. It's a nice touch.

TALIESIN: That is very fair.

ORION: I'm going to take this opportunity to cast Stoneskin on myself.

MATT: Okay. Stoneskin is placed on you.

SAM: Are you a dwarf still?

TALIESIN: Are you a dwarf made of stone?

MATT: You have not turned Alter Self off. You are still a dwarf.

ORION: Yeah, that's fine.

MATT: Oh, Stoneskin is a concentration spell, so yes, that would eliminate the Alter Self spell. Okay, so you revert back to your dragon form, robed self, but Stoneskin is in effect. You using your, what's it called again?

MARISHA: Druidcraft.

MATT: Druidcraft! Thank you. The Prestidigitation for hippies. Portions of the wood begin to sprout from the outside of this dark wood barrel and form these entangled ivy vines that eventually embrace the entirety of this cask with little buds of dark, ruddy flowers. Something that would definitely appeal to a dwarven aesthetic.

MARISHA: That's hot.

MATT: You approach the guards, of which there are eight currently at the front.

LAURA: Can I use my perception to see which one of them looks maybe the most interested or weakest?

MATT: Would be more of an insight.

LAURA: Insight! Which one of them looks most interested in our party.

MATT: Yeah.

LAURA: Oh, good. I thought that was a one, but it's not. It was a 13.

MATT: 13? Okay. Strangely enough, they are fairly distracted and after a rather long, uneventful morning, most of them are used to being in armor and waiting for business to go down. There are a few along the edges that look a little more alert, and one of them is looking occasionally down into the quarry. Just keeping an eye on the established area.

LAURA: Which one looks like the newest?

MATT: The newest of the bunch would be the one that's on the far left that is looking down into the quarry as well. He has a shaved head, has a small brownish beard that looks like he's starting to grow out into a nice, long tuft. Either it got shaved in some, I don't know, terrible college dwarf accident. You know part of his entry into some fraternity.

TRAVIS: Dwarf Sigma Sigma.

MATT: It's a fairly thick tuft of unkempt brown beard that goes about that far out. It's starting to be pulled in like tiny little scruffy braids. It's not quite there and he probably gets a lot of shit for it from the other dwarves. He seems to generally be looking at you guys.

LIAM: Okay, work your magic.

TRAVIS: Yeah, do your thing– fuck these dwarves up.

SAM: What are we trying to do?

LAURA: We brought this gift. Hello! We address all of them, maybe, right now, yes?

TALIESIN: She is better at this. I'm going to let her do this.

LAURA and SAM: Hello, hi!

ORION: Greetings and salutations!

MATT: The other guards reach back and grab their weapons. One of them looking to you.

ORION: Oh, you don't need that.

LAURA: I look over at the shaved-head one and I hold his gaze for a little bit.

LIAM: I give Vex a little push forward.

LAURA: Pardon me. Not yet!

MATT: “All right, what's your business?”

LAURA: Oh, yes, well– we are here to speak with Nostoc. We brought a gift for him that's quite remarkable, actually.

MATT: They curl up around the apparent barrel that Grog's holding. They look wary of Grog, but once they make note of the barrel they all, “Ooh!”

TRAVIS: Right? It's the shit.

MATT: “I've heard of that, but I've not seen anyone actually drink it. There were long standing rumors that this even existed.”

LAURA: It exists.

SAM: And it's for Nostoc.

MATT: “This is a Balgus original?”

LAURA: Yes.

MATT “Signed by himself I see on the burned, emblazoned wood. I'll go talk to him!” He heads inside of the building, the doors close behind him. The other guards encroach, keeping a very keen eye, each one having a bead on the rest of your group. About two minutes pass before he comes back, opens the door and the dwarf goes, “Nostoc will see you briefly, but you best bring the gift. I think that's what's holding his interest.”

ORION: Wonderful!

MATT: “Inside, please.” Him and one other guard flank you guys as you enter, making sure that you are not left without that appearance. You are led into the center of this portion of the mine's main structure, a series of long hallways. There's this general smell of soot and ash and broken stone dust in the air. A hint of brimstone-ish smell. It's not very pleasant, it's very well worn and pungent for those of you who spend most of their time on the surface. As you enter, there is a general dust in the air, a little light seems to peek through from the torches that are placed up along the wall. You can see this general haze amongst the interior here. It's definitely a work environment at the base of an underground dwarven establishment used to mine. You are led further down the hallway. It curves to the left and you're brought into a large dwarven study. There are books on the walls, a series of ledgers and paper stacks on a large desk and at the center there sits a dwarf with fiery red hair cut very short, almost like a buzz-cut on the top, with a long beard that is not braided, but kept very smooth and very– not curly, not bunched, it's a very straight beard. He's very clean cut, he already has this intimidating dark glare. As you walk into the room he goes, “Okay, you brought me a drink. You have my attention. What brings you to the mines?”

SAM: We should have talked this through before.

TALIESIN: Well, several things actually. Several things bring us to the mine. My name, of course, is Percival Fredrickstein von Musel Klossowski de Rolo III.

ALL: You can call him Percy!

MATT: He raises his finger and goes, “You have not paid for your pleasantries yet.”

LAURA: Oh, of course. Grog, if you would.

LIAM: Tap that motherfucker!

TRAVIS: I am assuming he had a goblet on the table.

MATT: As you pull it up he pulls under his desk and pulls up a goblet. As you fill it, “Top it off! Thank you! Now put on the side of the desk!”

SAM: Wait! Mister Greyspine. Oh, okay, all right.

MATT: Puts it down. (satisfied sigh)

LAURA: Is it as amazing as we've heard?

MATT: “It's pretty fucking good.” He takes another long drag, while making sure you all watch him do this. This goes on probably a little longer, the pageantry of him drinking this in front of you is definitely a power play, and he's establishing some sort of unspoken dominance in the room. Eventually he finishes his tankard, sets it down under the desk again. “Right, so where were we?”

TALIESIN: We were here to call upon your expertise. We imagine that we are not the first strangers to Kraghammer to come through–

LAURA: – in the last few weeks.

TALIESIN: In the last few weeks. We believe one of our compatriots had some dealings with you, perhaps not as pleasant as the dealings we are hoping to have.

SAM: A lady, in fact.

LAURA: A halfling.

MATT: At which point, as you say that, he gets this grin to his face and goes, “Aye, I know of the one you speak.”

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: “She is a strong-headed one, that one.”

TALIESIN: Yes.

MATT: “She stepped on a few toes around this place.”

ORION: Oh, was she clumsy?

MATT: “One could say that, aye. You say you are compatriots of hers?”

TALIESIN: We're here to mend any broken bridges, so to speak.

MARISHA: Or broken toes, if you will.

MATT: “She certainly left a mess in her wake. There's this strange vision quest she kept talking about. It brought her into atmospheres– portions of this city, portions of my business that she has no right trespassing on. She went against Carver rules, she broke away from partial arrest and she went screaming down into the caverns of our mines without my permission, blade drawn on some crazed suicide mission.”

LAURA: You know what? We'll go after her. We'll bring her out. We'll get her out of your mines.

MATT: “Great. I'd like that actually.”

LAURA: Good!

TALIESIN: We'd be happy to clear out anything unpleasant that we happen to find in there in the meantime.“

ORION: How did she look?

TRAVIS: What?

MATT: "She looked small and angry. She seemed to have some weight to her. She was a strong lass.”

ORION: So not a looker is what you are saying.

MATT: He gives you this strange look and goes, “I will not discuss the physical aesthetics of a halfling.”

SAM: The dwarf is a feminist.

LAURA: How much would this task be worth to you? Obviously we are doing you quite a favor and we brought you quite a gift!

SAM: This cost us a thousand gold.

MATT: “Obviously this lass means a lot to you, doesn't she?”

LAURA: No, but I know she is probably wreaking havoc on your mines.

LIAM: We've come to correct the wrongs that she's done and come to bring her home.

MARISHA: It also sounds like there are some other terrible things wreaking havoc on your mines.

MATT: “There is nothing going on, we're fine. We have everything under control, we don't need your help for that. If you want to find your friend, go find her! If she is still alive. If not, take her corpse back and leave.”

TALIESIN: It's not help, sir. We are simply respecting you as a businessman. As a businessman I'm sure that you would disagree with unceremonious charity whether it would be to give it or receive it. We are making sure that our dealings with you are fair and balanced.

MATT: “I appreciate your offering. You have bought your time. Now, if you are here to go find your

friend, I'll let you pass. You may pass into the mine, but if at any moment you cross over to any sort of thieving bullshite–” Looks over at you. “I recommend–”

(laughter)

“I recommend– that you fall down the same path your friend likely did and get killed real quick. I don't take kindly to those who cross on my business.”

TALIESIN: I doubt that we could find anything of more value that what we have already brought you.

LIAM: We are here to right wrongs and I promise you, our business is finding her and returning home.“

MATT: "Then go.”

LAURA: Is that our business?

TRAVIS: Yeah, we are here to right wrongs and right lefts.

TALIESIN: And write comment cards.

MARISHA: Wait, before we dive into this mountain– we know that there's ghouls and god knows what else down there. Shouldn't we find out?

ORION: Yes, we should. Maybe some arcane house could tell us how to deal with these things.

LAURA: Yes. Do we have permission to enter within the next few days? Obviously we might need to be prepared.

ORION: Yes, do we have badges that we wear over so that they know–?

MATT: “I'll speak with the men. They'll let you down. If you come back, good on you. I think our business here is done.”

TALIESIN: Yes.

MATT: At which point, you hear muffled in the distance a loud ringing of a very loud bell.

(dinging)

At which point, he perks up a bit. “Our business here is done. Please, shove off.”

SAM: Which way do we go?

MATT: He looks over to the two other guards who are up front. The two Carvers say, “This way.”

LIAM: While he is talking I take a flask out of my cloak and approach the barrel and surreptitiously pour a little bit of it into the flask.

MATT: Sleight of hand check.

SAM: You're stealing beer?!

ORION: No, because we have to give it to those guards.

SAM: Fuck those guards, I can kill them all.

LAURA: Can I talk to good old Nostoc while he's doing that?

MATT: He currently does not seem like the talkative type at the moment, you can certainly try.

TALIESIN: I am going to make a fumble. I am going to attempt to assist a sleight of hand with a bit of a fumble.

MATT: He has already rolled it.

LAURA: Damn it. I am going to fall down. In front of Nostoc.

SAM: Oh!

LIAM: 13.

LAURA: I am going to fall down in front of Nostoc.

MARISHA: Come on!

TALIESIN: He is distracted by a bell.

MATT: As you fill your flask–

TRAVIS: Shit. Balls. Ass.

MATT: You hear this loud– (clears throat).

LAURA: Ow, oh my ankle! It hurts so very much.

MATT: This is the first time you have witnessed the pristine, delicate yet well trained palm of a dwarven hand go straight to its forehead.

LIAM: I carry the flask up to his cup and refill it and say: In my kingdom when a deal is set we drink together. I would like, not much, but to pour us all a drink and agree, surely this cask is weeks' worth of drink–

MATT: “Get out of my office.”

MARISHA: Take the flask, take the flask.

LIAM: I can see it is a cultural difference, my apologies.

ORION: Stop it. Just go! What are you doing?

LIAM: You're one to talk!

ORION: I'm on the earring.

MATT: A second and a third bell starts going off and the guards that are waiting for you guys. They're like– They start leading you outside and as you make your way outside the main building, you can now hear voices shouting, down in the quarry below.

LAURA: I lean down to one of the guards and say: What is that bell for?

MATT: “Something is flushing out of the quarry.”

LAURA: Flushing, what does that mean?

MATT: “We don't know.” Some of the guards are motioning each other to follow and some of them start going down to one of the tracks that leads down to one of the nearest quarry below.

TALIESIN: Just try and like practically usher our guards in that direction, since they seem to want to go in that direction. Let's see if we can push them in that direction.

MATT: Okay, you guys follow down towards the quarry, you ask the guard that question and he goes, “I don't know, we've had quite a few interesting things come through.”

LAURA: Like what? Oh, like what?

MATT: He swallows and says, “Things I can't describe.”

TALIESIN: Well, we can certainly help, lead on.

MARISHA: Is there anybody running out?

MATT: Not yet. As you head halfway down the quarry walkway, you begin seeing dwarves start running out of one of the large quarry tunnels.

MARISHA: I grab one of them.

MATT: Well, they're quite a distance from you. You're still walking down the side. They're a good 100 feet from you. They start running at you, you see blood streaking down one of their faces.

TRAVIS: Yes!

MATT: They're charging out, one of them has a weapon and is limping, and you start seeing small green scampering things rushing through. One, two, three, four, six, ten goblins come rushing out of the tunnel.

SAM: Ah, I don't like these guys.

LAURA: We should attack them! I string my bow.

MARISHA: Don't you have family history with them?

MATT: The three dwarves that are running out, one of them gets hacked down by one of the goblins and jumps on them and is tearing his neck.

TALIESIN: I take a shot. Right now.

LAURA: I take a shot. I shoot it!

MATT: Okay, both you guys roll–

LIAM: I throw a dagger.

MATT: You throw a dagger? Three of you, roll for attack.

TALIESIN: 19.

LAURA: 15.

ORION: Is there a clear area where there's a bunch of goblins running?

MATT: There is an open funnel towards the tunnel.

ORION: I'm going to throw a little Fireball, right there where those guys are.

MATT: Okay, you guys you all hit from this distance because goblins are puny little things. They're still a little small to see, but you're all pretty well trained and pretty honed with your aim. You fire simultaneously, gunshot echo through the hallway, arrows, flying dagger, you see three goblins fall off a nearby dwarf who goes, “Thank–” At which point a large fireball explodes, killing off about ten or so of the goblins and probably two of the dwarves.

ORION: Sorry about that!

MATT: The guards stopped.

SAM: Did you do that?

ORION: Yeah.

SAM: Fuck.

MATT: They start looking around and they see you pull out your weapons and they all take a step back and realize they don't want to die either. “Well go, if you're going to help, go!”

TALIESIN: We run straight in.

MATT: With you guys charging in, you can now see a handful more goblins are rushing out. They are like running really fast, sprinting.

MARISHA: I throw Entangle up, in the distance wherever they're coming from.

MATT: Okay, what's the radius on that?

MARISHA: Like a hundred feet.

MATT: That's the range. What is the radius?

MARISHA: Oh, 20-foot radius.

MATT: Okay. You find a portion of the central point where the things exit from the tunnel and these strange reddish vines begin to protrude and to begin to grab nearby goblins and pull them up in this massive, weird vine creature. You hear (stomping) and you now see two larger ogre-like creatures come storming out.

MARISHA: Oh, shit!

ORION: Wonderful!

MATT: Everyone roll initiative.

(cheering)

MARISHA: Oh, fuck. Goddamn it.

TALIESIN: Oh yeah!

TRAVIS: Take it!

MATT: All right, do we have initiatives 25 to 20?

TALIESIN: 27.

ORION: 21.

LAURA: Wait! I didn't roll yet.

MARISHA: You rolled a 20?

TALIESIN: I rolled a 20 plus seven.

MATT: 21, you said?

ORION: I have 21.

MATT: 21 for Tiberius. What did you get? One? Aw.

MARISHA: Oh, I rolled a two.

LIAM: It's six with the plus.

SAM: Fellows. I don't like goblins.

LAURA: 18.

MATT: You now see Scanlan, who's usually a jovial individual, his eyes begin to tense with fury.

SAM: I don't like goblins.

MARISHA: Is there anything that you know?

SAM: No, they will all die. Don't spare any of them.

TRAVIS: Copy that.

LAURA: 18.

MATT: All right, so we have–

TRAVIS: 18, too.

TALIESIN: 27!

LAURA: What?!

TRAVIS: Yeah, buddy.

TALIESIN: I have 27 initiative.

MATT: 15 to ten? Ten to five? Six.

TALIESIN: Wow, oh my god.

SAM: I got a three.

MATT: Okay. All right.

MARISHA: Four.

LIAM: It was a sudden attack, man.

SAM: We weren't ready.

MATT: You got a three.

MARISHA: To be fair I just cast Entangle. It works. I'm distracted holding Entangle.

MATT: Yeah, it's fine. Then we have Scanlan. I'll get you guys in placement here, as your bear is currently back at the inn.

LAURA: He is still?

MATT: Unless you wanted to bring him along.

LAURA: Well, I thought I brought him. I should have mentioned that.

MATT: All right, we'll say you brought him along. That's fine.

LAURA: I'm sorry, I should have emphasized that more.

MATT: That's all right. Those of you going first, we're going to keep you on the field here.

LAURA: Oh god.

MATT: A number of goblins that are currently held over here.

LAURA: They're easy. Goblins are easy. Orcs are not.

TRAVIS: Yeah, those are mine.

LAURA: Ogres?!

MATT: Top of the round, Percy you're up.

TALIESIN: I'm sitting down and I'm busting out Bad News.

MARISHA: Bust out Bad News!

MATT: Percy stops just as he gets to the quarry, a little bit elevated, and he pulls out from a small sack on his back this large elongated contraption, this weird construction that looks similar to the pepperbox he usually carries, but much larger and cumbersome. He sets it up on the ground with a small stand at the front and preps itself with a visual point.

TALIESIN: Ogre.

MATT: Ogre back here?

TALIESIN: Yep.

MATT: All right, roll for your attack with Bad News.

MARISHA: Have you used it before?

TALIESIN: Nope, first time.

MATT: His own tinkered construction, Bad News.

TALIESIN: That's a 30 attack.

MATT: Yep, that'll do it. Go ahead and roll damage.

MARISHA: Does that critical for you?

TALIESIN: 19 actually might.

MATT: Natural 19?

TALIESIN: Natural 19.

MATT: Yeah, that should critical for you.

TALIESIN: That does critical for me. I've never criticaled with this either. What does that mean?

MATT: That means the damage dice you double. Roll for damage, double that, and add your modifier after that.

MARISHA: Come on! Big money, no whammies. Yeah! Hell yeah!

TALIESIN: (counting) 27 points of damage.

TRAVIS: Get after it, big man!

MARISHA: Is that doubled?

TALIESIN: That's doubled.

MATT: You guys hear this cacophonous, large blasting sound, a flash of blue energy and sparks shoot out the back of the weapon. It actually lifts Percy off the ground for a second and he shifts himself from the sheer blast. This streaking, heated bullet, reddish, white hot, goes cascading through the air, plunges into the side of the ogre's shoulder with a smattering of blood splattering against the cave behind it. It's actually moved back a step and has to catch itself. Slams its club into the ground. That ends your turn?

TALIESIN: I can't do anything after that. That's just reload.

MATT: Tiberius, you're up.

ORION: I move within 60 feet of those big fellows.

TALIESIN: Bad news travels far and fast.

MARISHA: Nothing travels faster.

MATT: This is the entanglement, by the way.

LAURA: Oh, okay.

ORION: Right before there.

MATT: Everything there is fighting from the entanglement. Most of these goblins are currently inside of it.

ORION: I'm going to shoot a Scorching Ray at the big guy.

MATT: Both of them?

SAM: He said he moved within 60 feet of them.

MATT: You moved up to here? All righty.

MARISHA: They're all entangled, yeah?

ORION: That's good right there.

MARISHA: Still have Entagle up.

MATT: These guys here are entangled. These front goblins are not. Scorching Ray you said at which ones?

ORION: Actually, oh there's a bunch of those dudes, aren't there? I'm going to do a Fireball instead, right in the center of the juiciness where I can get a couple little guys and both the big guys.

MATT: All right, so I'd probably about there would be where you'd want it.

ORION: I'm going to do that, and I'm going to spend two sorcerer points immediately to do quickening spell and do another spell right after that.

MATT: Okay. As you rush up, you pull back your hand and you see the arcane red energy begin to flow in your palm. You then throw the beam out, and it arcs, slams into the center, and explodes hitting each of these five goblins and the two ogres. What's your DC on your spell?

ORION: My DC on my spell is–

MATT: Top of your spell page on the right.

ORION: Oh! Wait. Oh! 17, sorry.

MATT: 17, okay. Wow! The two ogres actually make their saving throws.

LAURA: Ugh!

MARISHA: Boo!

MATT: They got 18 and a 19.

TRAVIS: Roll crappier, ogres!

MATT: The goblins, however, all disintegrate.

LAURA: All of them?

MATT: There's no way they're going to survive the damage you– they (poofing). You see this hint of a red ash mist go, (squeaking) where they once were, and they are all turned to black nothingness. However, roll damage for the ogres. They get half damage because they made their reflex save. So 8d6 damage.

SAM: 8d6.

SAM: (counting) 27!

TRAVIS: What?!

MATT: 27, so half that. As the blast of fire dissipates, you can see one of the ogres is now burnt on half of its chest. Looking a little rough. There's blood streaking down from the side of his face where the shrapnel got thrown at him. The other ogre's looking okay.

ORION: He's a large creature isn't he?

MATT: Yes.

ORION: I'm going to use my second spell and do Telekinesis and pick one up and try to hurl him into the other one.

MATT: Okay. Which one? The one left here?

ORION: The one that's beaten up already.

SAM: I'm hard right now!

MATT: He does fail his saving throw. You lift him up in the air and throw him into that. That ogre is knocked prone by the impact.

ALL: Yeah!

MATT: The other one is also knocked prone. Before (splatting) into the wall, both of them slam to the ground.

MARISHA: With my vines, I make sure my vines really grapple him.

ORION: I turn to Grog: They're all yours, buddy!

MATT: Go ahead and roll 2d6 impact damage for the force of the throw.

ORION: Sweet! Impact damage? Ten.

MATT: Ten damage to each of them?

ORION: Yeah.

MATT: All right. Both of the ogres are now on the ground reeling from the impact. That brings us to Grog and Vex going simultaneously.

TRAVIS: Ladies first.

LAURA: Oh! Well, all right. I'm going to cast Hunter's Mark on the most damaged one.

MATT: Okay, that'd be this one here.

LAURA: All right. Then I'm going to shoot Lightning Arrow.

MATT: All right. Do you want to move a little closer?

LAURA: Yes, I do.

MATT: All right. That would put you right there.

LAURA: All right, cool. I'm going to shoot Lightning Arrow at them.

MATT: Okay. You pull out your arrow and as you pull it back, a little bit of energy courses through your fingers, strikes through your arrow. You can now see this crackling energy as you're pulling it taut in your bow. You let it loose, roll for attack.

LAURA: Okay! 21!

MATT: 21 hits.

LAURA: All right. Then I do something else. 1d8. Right?

MATT: Yep. You do the damage of the arrow plus the damage of the spell.

LAURA: Holy moly! So that's this. 13 for the arrow and then 4d8 for the spell. (counting) 17!

MATT: 17. Okay. The ogre that's been beaten, blasted by the fireball, it's getting up– (grunt). It grabs its club, and it begins to get up on one leg as the Lightning Arrow slams into its chest. You can see it hits. Looks down for a second, and then the charge pulses through its entire torso. As it does, it screams out, “Ugh!” into the cavern, its whole muscle system locks tight and it falls forward again, onto its chest, smoke rising off of its whole upper area, unmoving, on the ground. He is gone.

TRAVIS: Dang! Come on now!

LAURA: Yes! Then the other one takes 2d8 if he fails his saving throw.

MATT: Which, with a one, he does.

LAURA: Yes! Oh, he fails it so good.

MATT: Go ahead a roll damage for other ogre.

LAURA: Two. ten.

MATT: Ten damage. Nice. As he falls to the ground, the arc arcs over to the other one who drops his club for a second. Picks it up angrily.

LAURA: I can reassign my Hunter's Mark to him now?

MATT: You can.

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: Yes, all right. That brings us to–

LAURA: Oh, my Hunter's Mark! I didn't do my Hunter's Mark damage. But it doesn't matter. He's dead.

MATT: It doesn't matter. You killed him.

LAURA: All right, cool.

MATT: You just ultra killed him! (valley girl voice) He is so dead. Oh my god. This ogre is done. (normal voice) All right. The other ogre's angry. It's now the goblins' turn. These goblins rush up. They are dashing forward.

MARISHA: (valley girl voice) They are so dead.

TALIESIN: (valley girl voice) They're just, like, dead. This one moves around, and this one runs around to there. No attacks. Everyone make an insight check.

SAM: Insight check? Oh shit.

MARISHA: What happened? Why are we doing this?

TALIESIN: I literally get a one.

TRAVIS: (sings) Natural 20! On an insight check.

MARISHA: 20 total. 20.

LAURA: 22.

ORION: Four.

TALIESIN: Natural one. I'm really not paying attention.

MATT: You're dealing with the fact that you just fired your gun for the first time and it burned your hands a little. You're like “Ugh!”

SAM and MATT: Grog.

TRAVIS: Recites poetry.

MATT: Grog is familiar with one thing, fear in the eyes of his enemies. Looking at these goblins, they're not charging to attack. The attacks seem to be instinctual. They are running.

MARISHA: Oh, no!

MATT: They are scared.

LAURA: Yes!

MATT: They are fleeing from something.

SAM: From the ogres?

TRAVIS: Something behind the ogres.

LAURA: Oh, no.

SAM: May I make a request that you kill them anyway?

TRAVIS: It's like playing croquet at this point, so yes.

(laughter)

MATT: Grog, it's your turn.

TRAVIS: I would like to rage! And I would like to move to the right of all those stinking goblins!

MATT: Right over here?

TRAVIS: Yeah, a little more to the right. Yeah, a little more. Yeah, keep going. All the way flanking it there. Yeah. Yeah, and then I would like to give them the cleanest shave possible with my greataxe.

MATT: All right. Go ahead and roll for attack on the first one.

TRAVIS: 18 plus eight. That's 26?

MATT: That definitively hits. Go ahead and roll damage.

TRAVIS: Oh, damage, crap.

LIAM: (sings) Decapitation!

TRAVIS: Two plus the four. 13!

MATT: 13? Okay. As you rush up, you bring your axe into the first goblin to your right (whoosh) clean. You don't even feel resistance. You hear this little (wheeze) sound as this being is bisected.

TRAVIS: Oh, that was cute.

MATT: Its head and upper torso rolling off to the side before rolling to a stop. However, the inertia of your axe still keeps through to the one on the other side of you. Go ahead and roll for your second attack on that.

TRAVIS: 21!

MATT: Also hits, go ahead and roll damage.

TRAVIS: Oh, that was eight plus seven is 15!

MATT: As you cleave through the first goblin, you swing around, another goblin looks up at you, scared, and pulls a dagger out with its gnarled tongue, (hisses), at which point the axe embeds itself straight into its face. Its angry face goes, “Ugh!” and falls slack against your blade. You lift backward, and it's stuck to the edge of your axe. Just limply dangling against– you shake it off a little bit.

TRAVIS: Double prizes! Yeah!

MATT: Great. That ends your turn. The thing about rage is that you can use your bonus action for a third attack. If you wanted to do a frenzy action, but you don't need to. That brings us to the ogre's turn. The ogre gets up, let's see if it makes its saving throw for an attempt to get out. It does with an 18. However, the ogre gets about that far. It's going to make a double move.

LAURA: Double move?!

TALIESIN: He's running.

MARISHA: I still have Entangle up.

MATT: I know. He managed to resist it.

LAURA: He saved against it.

MATT: It's a big ogre.

MARISHA: Poop.

MATT: The ogre takes his full turn to get up in melee with you guys. It does not have its attack since it used its full movement there. Once again, you see as it's lumbering forward, it also has this look in its eye of desperation.

SAM: Oh crap.

ORION: We should just let it pass.

MATT: Now it is Vax's go.

LIAM: My sister's right in the face of the ogre, correct?

MATT: Correct.

LIAM: Excellent. I'm going to take a run towards my sister, since she's right close to him, he's distracted so I'm going to turn just as I get to her, so my back presses against hers and swing around and sneak attack two daggers up in his belly.

LAURA: We've practiced this, I turn.

MATT: All right. As you dodge to the side, this blur of shadow and speed, you coast up to the side of your sister, dagger both plunge towards the side of the ogre. Go ahead and roll for an attack.

LIAM: All right. One. Then the other one I do a poison dagger, gets a (singing) 20!

TRAVIS: Oh, put it on him brother!

MATT: All right.

LIAM: That is dagger of venom, 1d4. Three, plus two is five, and then is the sneak attack damage go with–?

MATT: Yeah it does because you have another ally adjacent to it. You don't get advantage on the attack roll, but you can still do the sneak attack.

LIAM: Critical hit, too, as well, wouldn't it?

MATT: Yeah! You can multiply the sneak attack damage.

LIAM: Five, plus- and the double goes to the sneak attack damage?

MATT: It does. Modifiers don't double, but any dice you roll double.

LIAM: Nine, 15–

MATT: In my game. (clicks tongue)

LIAM: So 30 plus five, 35.

MATT: 35 damage.

LIAM: Plus poison.

MATT: The poison's not going to factor in. You swing past her, both blades jam right into the side of its rib cage. You hear it howl out in pain. As it does, you twist the daggers in a way where both blades are now going in two different directions, and you carve out a section of its entire abdomen. As you do, the flesh, like whale blubber, sloughs off the sides of it. Organs spill out, intestines, and it looks down and tries to pull them back in. You see the color draining from its face, and you lean up and kick it down. The ogre and falls to the ground lifeless, destroyed.

TALIESIN: You gave him just enough time to regret everything that had ever happened.

MATT: Yes.

TALIESIN: Well done. Bad life choices.

MATT: That brings us to Keyleth.

MARISHA: I didn't call my mom enough.

LAURA: There are two goblins left?

MATT: There are two goblins left.

MARISHA: Okay. I do a quick sprint jog up towards Grog and go (boof) and bring up a big stone wall. Right where that entrance is.

MATT: Right here?

MARISHA: No. Like, right where things are pouring out.

MATT: Right, here?

MARISHA: Yeah.

MATT: All right, Wall of Stone.

MARISHA: Wall of Stone– boom.

MATT: All right. A giant wall of stone now completely seals off that part of the mine.

MARISHA: We don't know what's in there, we should talk about this for a second, and I bought us some time. I'm sure it's going to try to beat through that door in a second.

MATT: I'm going to say that you moved up to there with your movement. All right, I'd say probably over here, not right next to the goblins and that will give you enough range. Okay, so the wall of stone–

(boom)

MARISHA: Are there any guards around still? Any dwarven guards?

MATT: They are all watching you do this now. They don't want to put their lives at risk, and you guys seem intent on getting into the middle of this battle, so they are going to sit back and let you do it.

MARISHA: I throw up my wall and turn around and I say: What's coming?! Tell us! You know what's coming. What's coming?!

MATT: Make an intimidation check.

LAURA: Keyleth, you are so hardcore.

MARISHA: I'm not good at this.

SAM: You speak goblin?

MARISHA: Oh, four.

(laughter and groaning)

MARISHA: (tearfully) What's coming?

TALIESIN: Make a pity roll.

MATT: A very gentle attempt at intimidation, however, the message gets across. The guards look at you, taken off guard.

MARISHA: We are about to die. It is in your best interest to tell us.

MATT: “We don't know! It's been different things. Strange abominations. It's hard to describe. They're put together. Something's making things down there.”

MARISHA: What kind of things? From where?

MATT: As they're talking, you hear a (boom) against the stone.

TALIESIN: (clicking) Sitting down.

TRAVIS: I bring out my blade.

MATT: The stone cracks, and you can see a noticeable crack and an audible (cracking).

LIAM: I'm running right now diagonally towards the wall and I press against the wall.

LAURA: Oh, good call. I do the same thing on the other side.

MATT: Okay, so you come over here. Do you want to bring Trinket with you?

LAURA: Yeah!

MATT: All right.

TALIESIN: You're all so fancy.

MARISHA: I cast Stoneskin on myself.

LAURA: We're stealthing, I'm stealthing.

MATT: Roll stealth both of you.

ORION: How tall are the walls? I mean the ceiling.

MATT: Oh, the ceiling right now is the rest of Kraghammer for the most part.

TRAVIS: Hundreds.

MATT: Yeah, it is a huge ceiling.

TRAVIS: What's in the middle? Are those fires?

MATT: These are braziers here. By the way, Stoneskin goes, this disappears.

TRAVIS: The entanglement?

MATT: Yeah, the entanglement is gone. There are minecarts, some rocks, there is a smashed cart over here from when the ogre barreled through. This is a piece of stone that rises about 15 feet, and these are both braziers for light in the center of the area. Yeah, it's hundreds and hundreds of feet up. You can look up to the very top of Kraghammer from here.

ORION: Okay, that's fine.

MATT: Whatcha got? Well, let's see. Keyleth, that's your turn, Stoneskin and moving up. Anywhere else you want to go? Right now, we're technically not in combat.

SAM: Right. We're out of combat.

MATT: Briefly.

TALIESIN: I'm breathing deep, taking aim at the wall, resetting everything.

MARISHA: Can I move up behind that pillar?

MATT: Okay.

TALIESIN: I'm staying far back at the moment.

MATT: Back here. Both of these goblins– I'll just say that you guys end up taking them down. It's not even a question. You step on them and crush them.

TRAVIS: Are there any dwarves that we can say to go get Ballsack and bring him down?

MATT: You can.

LAURA: Oh yeah, Balgoos! Balgus.

MATT: Balgus? You tell them, “Get Balgus!” and they're like, “Who?” Some of them have set crossbows up by the way. They're barreling down to get ready to fire at whatever comes through. (impact) Another crack in the wall. You can see the dust settle as the stone cracks again and a large piece at the top tumbles off. The stone wall's probably not going to hold another impact. Anybody else want to move anywhere?

TALIESIN: Just taking aim.

SAM: I'll move up to the right near where Grog is. No one's has taken any damage yet, right?

MATT: Not currently, no. You guys have had a pretty clean sweep into this battle, so far.

SAM: I can't inspire anybody here? Now?

MATT: You can inspire anybody. Just give them a dice.

SAM: Can I inspire everyone?

MATT: You can spend all your uses to inspire as many people as you have the uses of it.

MARISHA: I still have mine that I haven't used yet.

SAM: I'll inspire Vex and Vax and Grog.

SAM: (singing) I think you're really handsome and nice! You're going to have inspiration dice!

TRAVIS: Thought you were going to have a little–

LAURA: I know, some beautiful song for us! Wait, what for all of us? We all get a d8?

MATT: Each of you has to have a single d8 dice, inspiration dice. The bardic inspiration is flowing through you, that you can use to add to an attack roll, not damage. You can add it to an attack roll, a saving throw.

SAM: (plays tune on electric piano app)

MATT: There you go. That's what a shawm sounds like, apparently. You can use it on attack roll, a saving throw, or an ability check. Any skill. Tiberius, are you going to stay where you are, are you moving anywhere? Last chance.

ORION: Is that cover right there next to me?

MATT: Right over here? Yeah.

ORION: I'll get behind the cover. I'm going to peek out and I'm going to cast Blur.

MATT: Okay, Stoneskin goes away.

ORION: I can't do both?

MATT: Nope. They're both concentration spells.

ORION: Okay, I leave Stoneskin.

MATT: Okay, Stoneskin stays on. At which point (boom) the stone breaks through scattering across the ground. Immediately bursting through–

TRAVIS: What the fuck is that?

LAURA: What is it?

MATT: A bulbous, oversized, naga-like creature. You've encountered a naga before, which is a large serpentine creature with a humanoid head. However, this one is swollen, it is bulbous. The way it moves looks unnatural and it has affixed to it not one, not three, but five other different colored naga heads stitched to its body. It is a seriously terrible abomination. As it breaks through the stone, (hisses and growls) all the heads rear back.

MARISHA: Do naga heads do something if you look at them?

MATT: We're beginning back at the top of the initiative order.

TRAVIS: Oh shit!

LAURA: Wait! I got a question! My Hunter's Mark, can I transfer it to that thing or do I have to–

MATT: Correct, you can, yes. Because this still part of the encounter.

LAURA: Sweet!

MATT: That is now marked with the Hunter's Mark. Percy, you're up first.

TALIESIN: Do I have to take new aim or can I have myself already trained on–

MATT: You've had a moment to train. You haven't seen the creature until it just burst out, so it would take you a round to aim.

TALIESIN: I'm taking my round to aim.

MATT: Okay, so you're aiming. That brings us to Tiberius.

ORION: What did you just do?

TALIESIN: I just took aim. Took aim. Just a gun.

LAURA: Did we roll initiative again?

MATT: I'm keeping the same initiative order.

TALIESIN: This gun doesn't do anything fancy. Just shoots really far, really hard.

ORION: Okay! I'll do a Scorching Ray.

MATT: Scorching Ray, all right. It makes a saving throw. It does not! Rolled a two, so full damage on it.

ORION: Two– four. Let's shoot two of them right now, right, three of them?

MATT: It's an aimed ray attack?

ORION: Yeah.

MATT: Then you have to roll for the attack. Roll a d20 and add your–

TRAVIS: Roll high, roll high.

MATT: Top of your spell page.

ORION: Oh! That's 23.

MATT: 23? 23 hits.

ORION: Yes, okay. Then that's 2d6. That's 12.

MATT: 12 points of damage to the naga. That brings us to–

ORION: Wait. I roll for the second shot, right?

MATT: Yeah.

ORION: Okay, and that's a natural 20.

(cheering)

MATT: Okay, so you fire one beam off and it slams into the side of one of the naga heads. The second you bring back and as you do there's a flicker of arcane instability. His arm shakes as he releases the surge of scorching energy as it blasts into the side of the naga. Also, does not make a saving throw again! Roll full damage.

TRAVIS: Holy shit, Tiberius.

TALIESIN: Oh my god.

ORION: 12.

MATT: 12?

ORION: Yeah.

MATT: Multiplied? Or did you roll a 12?

ORION: I rolled a 12.

MATT: 12. Times two. 24 points of damage.

ORION: Oh! I'm terrible at math! Stay in school, kids!

MARISHA: This is a good time to note our charity, 826LA.

SAM: Not yet. Don't donate yet. Donate next week.

MATT: Next week, you can donate to then. All right, so that brings us to the end of Tiberius' turn. You want to move at all, are you staying where you are?

ORION: I'll stay right here.

MATT: Grog and Vex, you're up.

TRAVIS: Ladies first.

LAURA: Oh! Me! Okay, I'm going to shoot– oh god, I didn't realize I was going so fast.

MATT: What did you roll for stealth, by the way?

LAURA: What?

MATT: What did you roll for stealth, by the way?

LAURA: I rolled a 20 for stealth!

MATT: Then yeah, he has no idea you're there.

LAURA: Sweet!

MATT: He sees the bear going (growling).

LAURA: Okay. Trinket's going to hang out because I don't want to– you know. I'm going to shoot Conjure Barrage. No, I'm just going to shoot him twice.

MATT: All right, go for it!

LAURA: All right.

MATT: Arrow once, arrow twice, Legolas style.

LAURA: I am going to do the fire arrow thingy at it.

MATT: Okay, so using your bowstring.

LAURA: The blazing bowstring. Thank you, Tiberius!

MATT: That he created and crafted! All right so as you pull the second arrow out you nock it. As you let it, go it bursts into flames arcing halfway through the air.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: What was your to hit roll on that?

LAURA: 21?

MATT: 21 hits!

LAURA: Oh wait, that's four plus seven is 11.

SAM: Don't forget your inspiration!

MATT: Well inspiration dice is to hit.

SAM: Oh, okay.

LAURA: 11.

MATT: 11 points of damage.

LAURA: For the first one, plus for the blazing bowstring I can turn any arrow into a flaming arrow, doing additional ten fire damage. I'll roll that right now, which is this. Which is a seven!

MATT: An additional seven, so 18 total damage and that arrow (impact) in the side of its body. One of the serpent heads reels back from the pain. It begins snatching at where the arrow's now protruding from it, trying to break it off.

LAURA: Then I'm going to roll again! That's a 24!

MATT: That hits, go ahead and roll damage.

LAURA: Awesome. That's an eight.

MATT: Grog, you're on deck.

LAURA: Seven plus seven is 14!

MATT: 14 damage, all right. Both arrows sink into it. Definitely piercing through the scales a little bit, but not sticking too deeply into its body; it's definitely a hearty creature. Grog, you're up!

TRAVIS: Right, I would like to run around the other side of the rock, raging, spit flying out my of my mouth! I would like to use the chain of returning, also crafted by Tiberius, attach it to the end of the greataxe, and throw it from where I am at the snake.

ORION: Yeah!

MATT: He comes running around, rears back, and takes his double-handed great axe and lobs it overhand. The chain, that's wrapped around your wrist, keeping it attached to you, in some degree. Go ahead and roll for the attack.

TRAVIS: Eight, nine, 17!

MATT: 17? It just hits!

TRAVIS: All right, nice. That is 15.

MATT: 15 points of damage. The axe embeds itself pretty deeply into the torso.

LAURA: Oh! I didn't do my Hunter's Mark.

MATT: Roll Hunter's Mark damage right now.

LAURA: Thank you, chatroom!

Six!

MATT: Six? Awesome. Six damage. All right.

TRAVIS: This says, “An athletics-strength check is required to pull the weapon free, the DC 12?”

MATT: Go ahead and roll an athletics check.

TRAVIS: 12.

MATT: Roll a d20.

TRAVIS: Oh, a d20.

MATT: It's a DC 12.

TRAVIS: Shit. Balls. Taint. Five.

MATT: Plus–

TRAVIS: Plus what?

MATT: Plus your athletics!

TRAVIS: Oh! That's bound to be good. Seven! It's 12!

MATT: 12 is the DC! So yeah!

TRAVIS: (elated laughter)

MATT: You pull back the chain and as you do, the blade is resisting, it's stuck in the torso and it actually (whoosh) and flies back, and you barely catch it.

TRAVIS: (nervous laughter)

MARISHA: I love your joy sounds!

TRAVIS: Meant to do that! Meant to do that of course.

MATT: Now it's its turn.

LAURA: Oh no!

MATT: (bursts of wind)

TRAVIS: Yeah, come on!

SAM: What? Why me? No, that's not me.

MATT: For its size, when it moves, it moves in a burst of lightning energy. It's too fast for its corpulent form. As it goes behind to Keyleth and Tiberius, it makes an attack with each of its five heads. Two on Tiberius, three on Keyleth. Remember, you guys have Stoneskin, so I believe you have resistance against damage, right?

ORION: Oh yes, I do.

MATT: All right. So. Against Keyleth, it's a natural 20.

ALL: Oh no!

MATT: That's a 12 plus seven, that's going to be a 19 to hit?

MARISHA: Yeah.

MATT: Natural 20 again.

MARISHA: What the fuck!

MATT: Two critical hits, and a hit on you.

TRAVIS: What is this bullshit?

MATT: On Tiberius, that's a 22 to hit and a 13 to hit.

ORION: One does, one does not.

MATT: Okay, cool. Against Keyleth, you take–

MARISHA: I'm glad I cast Stoneskin.

MATT: I know. So you take half damage for these. Which is fine.

MARISHA: Yeah.

MATT: That's two plus four, that's six, damage halved, you take three damage. Oh, sorry. Three multiplied by two because it's a critical. So you take six damage from the first strike.

LAURA: That's nothing! Six damage.

MATT: Not too bad. You take seven damage from the second strike, and another six damage from the 3rd strike. Actually, it would have been six, four and six. Because you have resistance on the damage because of Stoneskin.

MARISHA: Six, four and six?

MATT: Yes. However, make a constitution saving throw. As venom from the fangs of the naga begin to pulse into your bloodstream.

MARISHA: I should have taken the poison resistance. He talked me out of it. What am I–constitution.

MATT: Yeah, constitution saving throw.

MARISHA: Fuck!

MATT: Natural one? Natural one on the constitution saving throw.

LAURA: Oh no!

MARISHA: It's a bad day.

MATT: You feel this burning pain pulse into your bloodstream, as your whole body doubles over from the pain.

SAM: Keyleth dies in episode one.

MATT: You suffer 31 points of poison damage.

MARISHA: 31, on top of the six, four and six?

MATT: Yep.

TRAVIS: Are you okay?

MATT: The poison damage is not halved because it is not a physical attack on your body.

LAURA: Is Keyleth unconscious?

SAM: No, she's okay.

MATT: Tiberius you take 13 points of damage halved by Stoneskin so you take a total of seven. Also make a constitution saving throw.

Whatcha got?

ORION: It's a 16.

MATT: 16, you manage to physically resist the poison in your system. You feel that slight tinge, the muscles tense, but then your dragonborn form begins to shrug off the effect of the venom.

ORION: Can I turn to him and blow fire out of my nostrils?

MATT: Sure.

ORION: That's what I do.

MATT: True dragonborn challenge. That brings us to Vax.

LIAM: Okay, I start jogging backwards.

MARISHA: Took me down to 16 hit points.

LIAM: Can I sneak attack while prone?

MATT: You're stealthed currently, so you would technically get a sneak attack, but you have to be in melee for you to get the other bonus. It would be sneak attack for this damage if you were to roll or if you were to throw a dagger at it, you would get the sneak attack.

LIAM: Okay, so that means one throw instead of two?

MATT: You can throw both daggers at it.

LIAM: All right. I feel so inspired by Scanlan's bardic tunes–

SAM: (singing) Yeah!

MATT: You can add it after you make the roll by the way.

LAURA: If you do a really good roll then you don't need it.

LIAM: Okay, 19 plus 11 is 30.

MATT: Because you're a rogue, isn't that critical for you?

LIAM: Yeah. Oh, yeah.

MATT: Two criticals!

LIAM: The other one, the other one is a 16 plus, plus– is a 26.

MATT: That also hits. You chuck both daggers out, they both arc around. You're used to throwing around–

LIAM: I meant to say I was aiming at its eye, the main head's eye.

LAURA: No, you should've said that first.

MATT: For flavor it's fine. Just go ahead, it's fine.

LIAM: All right, four.

LAURA: Four!

LIAM: (counting)m 20. 20 times–is 40 plus four. 44, that's the first dagger?

MATT: Yeah, 44 damage.

LIAM: 44.

TRAVIS: Damn!

MATT: Rogues, man.

MARISHA: Help me. Help!

LAURA: That's just one dagger?

LIAM: That's just one. Four plus two is six. Is that sneak attack? No.

MATT: No, only one sneak attack per turn.

LIAM: Okay.

LAURA: 40 and then six on the other one.

MATT: One actually hit one of the heads, one of the various naga heads directly into its face. As it does it goes through both eyes and you can see it begin reeling from the attack. It's looking pretty rough, actually. The stitches beginning to come apart at some of the seams and you can see a black ichorous liquid spill out from some of the suture marks.

LIAM: Just a reminder the daggers, folks, blink back to the belt on my waist.

MATT: Because magic. Magic rogue shit. Keyleth, you're up.

LAURA: Kill him!

MARISHA: Okay, so I'm really upset, really hurting. Out of anger I take my staff and I go (bam) and I crack and do Thunderwave pushing him back 15 feet.

MATT: All right. Makes the saving throw. He gets pushed back, so he takes damage, just half damage.

MARISHA: Okay, 2d8.

MATT: As you're setting up your gun it gets slammed right point blank to you.

MARISHA: Oh sorry. It takes four damage.

MATT: Four damage, all righty.

MARISHA: Then I'm going to turn into an eagle.

SAM: (laughs) As one does.

MATT: We'll say for that, because I forgot to bring an eagle, you're now a– (eagle sounds)

MARISHA: And I fly away.

TRAVIS: Away.

(laughter)

MARISHA: Far, far, away.

ORION: Where are you going?!

SAM: Tell our story, Keyleth.

MATT: That's pretty great.

MARISHA: Then I cry in the corner and rock back and forth a little bit. That's my turn.

MATT: I forgot to mention you actually take half damage for the saving throw for the venom so you still would've taken 14 points of poison damage, so mark that.

ORION: Okay.

MATT: It is half damage on a save. That brings us to Scanlan.

SAM: Can I bonus inspire myself?

MATT: Because you're Scanlan I'll say, yes. You have such a high opinion of yourself that even you could inspire yourself. So yes, why not.

SAM: (singing) It would help me to acquire some dice to inspire. (speaking) I inspire myself first and move five feet back so I'm on the same row as him.

MATT: There?

SAM: Not that far.

MATT: There.

SAM: Yes. Them I'm going to cast Lightning Bolt at him.

MATT: Okay! Straight line that way?

SAM: Straight line, that way.

MATT: You don't have to roll to hit. You just roll damage on that. I make a saving throw.

SAM: Oh! I didn't even need to inspire.

MATT: What's your DC on the spell? Top of your spell list.

ORION: 17.

SAM: Thank you.

MATT: 17? That's a failure on its saving throw. Go ahead and roll 8d6.

LAURA: 8d6?! Kill him!

MATT: Bards. Gets spells from other classes.

TRAVIS: If you kill, I will take a shit on this table.

SAM: (counting)

LIAM: It's gone.

SAM: 24!

MATT: 24 points of lightning damage.

SAM: Yes. (sings a high-pitched note)

MATT: How do you want to do this?

(yelling)

MARISHA: Wait! Is this the first time you've–

SAM: I've never killed anything before!

TRAVIS: Never killed anything in two years!

LIAM: For the people at home, we live to hear Matt say:

ALL: “How do you want to do this?”

MATT: I let the player describe their victory. As you sing to yourself to bolster your arcane energy, you release a shear bolt of energy. How do you want to do this?

SAM: The bolt of lightning begins in its tail and works its way up through its spine, slowly but painfully torturing it as it slowly, slowly feels the effect coursing through its evil body.

MATT: Because of your bardic ability to actually shape sound from an arcane standpoint, a lightning bolt should be an instant flash of arcane energy, you actually cause it to crawl. You control it as it begins to cascade up the torso of this horrible abomination. As it does you can see the bolts splinter and destroy each suture wound as each of its heads begins to slough off the rest of the torso until nothing is left but the single head screaming into the air. As the bolt makes its way up the neck, its eyes burst out in a blast of energy. The body falls limp to the ground.

SAM: Can it have a lightning bolt shaped in an “S?”

MATT: A Scanlan-shaped lightning bolt is burned into the torso of the strange naga beast.

TRAVIS: Well done, Scanlan, well done!

MATT: The dust settles, the adrenaline still pumping in your system, Scanlan. All the rest of the dwarves begin stepping down, putting their crossbows down, looking down at the little gnome that created a storm from its hands. One of them pats him on the shoulder and goes, “Well done.”

SAM: Thank you. Just promise me you'll that tell Pike about this.

MATT: “Okay?”

SAM: Because it was really cool, right?

MATT: “That was pretty cool.”

SAM: Okay, good.

MATT: All the dwarves look into the tunnel that it came from and the one that you spoke to earlier goes, “So that's the kind of thing that's been coming out of there.”

LAURA: Lovely.

MARISHA: Thanks for the heads up.

TALIESIN: That was really helpful.

MATT: We'll go ahead and leave the game there for the night.

(cheering)

MATT: Folks, well done. Hope you guys had fun watching our first ever Critical Role. That was a good time so we'll be here next week on Thursday. 7:00, though. Today was a special early edition because all of Geek & Sundry's going to South by Southwest.

ZAC: Good job, dude!

MATT: Dude, thank you, Zac!

ZAC: This is so much fun. This is the most fun I've had all week now until I die of stress behind the camera.

MATT: Good! That's good.

ZAC: Guys, I hate to end it so abruptly but we're actually packing up the cameras that are filming me now, our unit, everything, lights, and getting on a plane and heading to South by Southwest. We may stream tomorrow, we may not, we're flying blind, we'll see what stuff looks like when we get there. Thank you guys so much and we'll be back next week, 7:00pm. Next week guys, it's going to be great.

MATT: Thank you all for coming! 

Pre-Show

MATT: Hello everyone, and welcome to the second episode of Critical Role, where a bunch of us crazy voice actor, nerdy types sit here and play Dungeons and Dragons. We'll be continuing from last week's adventure, so in the meantime, let's go ahead and show you some of the character backstory.

TRAVIS: Right, listen up. If you have ale, then you have a friend in Grog Strongjaw. A goliath of towering height and size, this barbarian has an appetite for the two great loves in his life: combat, women, and ale. (record scratching) Wait. Easily the brains of the group, Grog is often consulted for his vast knowledge of shapes, colors, and shiny things. Also ale. In his early years, armed with his two-handed greataxe, Grog oft enjoyed proving his might amongst the ranks of his family's wandering herd, but after coming upon an unsuspecting elderly gnome in the woods, he objected to the killing of such an innocent life. A creature of impulse, Grog felt only pity for this, (chuckles) this terrified little thing. His disobedience cost him dearly. Beaten bloody and banished by the herd leader, his uncle Kevdak, Grog was abandoned and left to die. Exiled from his herd, it was then that the relative of the very gnome he fought to save, saved him. It was the kindness of a gnome cleric named Pike that healed Grog, bringing him back from death's edge. And they have remained close friends ever since. Most nights, Grog can be found challenging entire taverns to wrestling matches, ha! Or accompanying Scanlan to the nearest house where you pay for lady favors, huh. Also ale.

MARISHA: A first impression of Keyleth would leave you with little information on the half-elven druid. You might even think that her social awkwardness due to her sheltered upbringing is kind of sweet. Of course, it would be unwise to underestimate her based on first impressions. (lightning roaring) Under that unintimidating, petite frame is a vicious beast waiting to be unleashed whose natural powers have made even the fiercest of champions pee their pants, literally. (giggles) Born to the air tribe of the Ashari people, Keyleth was raised with a deep love of nature and the elemental magics. It is her people's inherent duty to protect the delicate areas in Tal'Dorei, where the four elemental planes begins to bleed with this realm. Since she was a little girl, she had quite a knack for air manipulation and beastshaping abilities. Well, if you consider kittens and flying squirrels to be little beasts, which I do. (clears throat) Anyways, it wasn't long before the headmaster of the tribe, her father, Kohren, realized her true prodigious abilities and she was inveterated to succeed him as the next headmaster. Just like that, her jovial childhood was stripped and replaced with endless spell memorization, teachings from ancient traditions, and exceedingly high expectations. Every druid leader-to-be must embark on a journey to seek out the sister tribes in order to introduce and establish respect amongst the fellow headmasters. They call this the Aramente, or Noble Odyssey. When her father felt she was ready, he set her on the path to truly discovering herself. Not knowing when, or if, she will ever return. As she hikes down the mountain towards Stillben, she meditated on the task ahead. Part of the Aramente is proving yourself a strong warrior, a valiant protector, and a wise and compassionate leader. With this knowledge, one thought plays in repeat in her mind: Is she even worthy?

TALIESIN: Percy was the third child of seven children, born to a noble family who lived far to the north in the ancient castle of Whitestone. With so many siblings to share the burdens of lordship, Percy turned his attention to the sciences, engineering, and naturalism. One day, a mysterious couple named Lord and Lady Briarwood came to court. During a feast held in their honour, the Briarwoods violently took control of the castle, killing or imprisoning everyone who would stand in their way. Percy awoke chained in the dungeon, only to be freed by his younger sister. Together they fled, chased by the Briarwoods' men. As they ran, Percy's sister took several arrows to the chest and fell. Percy kept running, eventually jumping into a freezing river and floating unconscious to freedom. He did not remember waking up on a fishing boat. He barely remembered the next two years, as he slowly made his way as far south as possible. Then one night, Percy had a dream. A roaring cloud of smoke offered him vengeance against those who destroyed his family. When he awoke, Percy began to design his first gun. (gun clicking) (explosion roaring)

SAM: Oh, you haven't heard of Scanlan Shorthalt? Well, gird your loins, ladies, because he has his eye on you. A talented musician, master of disguise, and dashingly handsome in his own mind, Scanlan sings songs almost as much as he sings his own praises. Born a poor gnome, Scanlan used his endless charm and soaring tenor voice to croon for coin and support his single mother. One day he was discovered by a half-orc promoter, and joined Dr. Dranzel's Spectacular Traveling Troupe, where he learned the ways of the world, and honed his skills as a bard extraordinaire. A loner much of his life, Scanlan has never quite come to terms with the violent death of his mother at the hands of a goblin invasion. While his years on the road provided many, shall we say, educational experiences with the opposite sex, deep down Scanlan yearns for the one thing he's never known, the true love of a fellow gnome. Still, Scanlan considers himself a lover first, performer second, and fighter distant third. On the battlefield, he'll support his allies, but rarely draws blood unless it's to protect fellow gnome, Pike. Count on Scanlan for a hearty laugh, a rollicking song, and a twinkle in his eye that melts hearts and makes the females swoon.

ORION: Greetings and salutations. I am Tiberius Stormwind. I hail from a town called Ty'rex, located in the heart of Draconia, from a politically respected family. At the age of 15, I succeeded in passing the Sorcerer's Rite, showing prodigy-like control of my magic. The judges and the Draconian high council were amazed at how powerful my spells were for how long I had been training. At 20 years old, I was the youngest appointed member of the magic guild in Draconian history. For the next few years, I almost went mad from the malaise of being a guild member, as it's rather boring. However, one day I happened upon a chamber, unused for quite some time. In the room were stacks of books and maps of the surrounding cities and areas around the known world. For months I would frequent the chamber, and learned of artifacts from legend. After a long period of research, I made a list of artifacts that caught my eye. I brought these findings to the high council and was told that all of the information in the chamber I stumbled upon was either believed to be fiction, or unsolvable mysteries, and hence were lost forever. I found those answers to be unacceptable. A year later I devised a ruse and managed to convince the city council to lend support in me leaving Draconia on a mission of peace and diplomacy for the surrounding kingdoms. Going from town to town and making friends and allies, in and for the name of Draconia. Being a red dragonborn, I had quite the task on my hands in that respect, but it was exactly what I needed, so I could explore the world and find these artifacts, as I felt the truth was out there. Some may describe me as buffoonish, but I say poppycock to all that. (mutters) I am much sharper than most give me credit for. I just don't pay attention to things sometimes. I've also been known to be rather cunning, loyal, happy-go-lucky, and well, dangerous. I can't help but show my true scales every now and then. But overall, I think I'm quite friendly for a dragonborn.

LIAM: Never entirely welcome in the company of elves or men, Vax'ildan learned at a young age to skip past formality, preferring instead to invite himself in your door. Along with twin sister Vex'ahlia, Vax was born by a chance encounter between elven royalty and human peasantry. Raised by their mother in their early years, the twins were eventually sent off to their father in the elven capital of Syngorn. But their cool reception among the elves there never warmed, and their time in the capital didn't last. The siblings stole away one autumn night and set out on the open road. After a few years of wandering, they eventually decided to return to their mother, and journeyed back to the lands of their youth. But instead of finding their childhood home, they returned to a pile of rubble. Their mother was gone, their home burned to ash. Pressing the townspeople for answers, they learned of the day the dragon came. (loud roaring) With their ties all severed, Vax'ildan and his sister set out to find their fortune together in Tal'Dorei. An outsider since birth, Vax quickly learned to solve life's challenges in his own particular way, often by sidestepping them entirely. And when his knack for circumventing adversity isn't enough, (sword slicing) the way of blades the elves schooled him in more than makes up the difference.

LAURA: Like so many half-elves, Vex'ahlia has spent most of her life suffering the cool reception of a people who don't fully accept her. Born of a human mother and an elven father, who only later in life took an interest in their existence, Vex'ahlia and her twin brother Vax'ildan quickly realized the only people they could truly rely on in this world were each other. It was at the age of ten when the two were taken from their mother, and brought to live in Syngorn, the isolated elven city for which their father was an ambassador. He quietly took them in, but always kept an icy distance, and after too many years of disdainful looks, the pair decided to leave his indifference behind, and set out on their own. Vax took to the cities, stealing small trinkets and learning the ways of the thief, while Vex kept to the woods. She preferred the isolation. Always the keen observer, she learned to hunt and to track, to spy and to shoot. And through a series of fateful events, earned herself a companion in the form of a bear, her own stolen trinket, (bear growling) to fight alongside her and protect her fiercely. Also, he is adorable and gives expert massages. Welcome back everyone. So, know that you're a little more affiliated with the characters, let's get this party started. So as a head's up, I wanna let you know, once again, we're waiting for the charity elements of this stream to open up again, since the big charity that happened a couple weeks ago. Once we do, we're gonna be taking donations, half to go to help run the channel, the other to donate to 826. Marisha will explain that here in just a second. As a head's up, Ashley, who plays our cleric, Pike, unfortunately couldn't make it again this week, because she's busy filming amazing stuff with her career being amazing. But she says she's sad she can't be here. She loves you guys, and as soon as Pike can re-enter the campaign, hopefully in a couple weeks, all awesome gnomeness shall double. So also tonight, there was a goal to try and hit 1,000 subscribers on the channel. So what we're gonna do is, we only have 130 people to subscribe tonight. If we can get all 130 before the show ends this evening, we're gonna do a random selection of a person within those thousand subscribers to win a copy of the Player's Handbook signed by all of us, as well as a really, really cool image that was tweeted out earlier by Geek & Sundry, also signed by all of us. So, go ahead and pull your friends, see if we can get some more subscribers before the show's out tonight, so hopefully that'll be fun. So, Marisha, if you wanna go ahead and explain a little bit about the charity 826 we'll be plugging in the near future. Yes, 826 LA is a non-profit charity organization that helps kids though the age of six to 18 with their creative and structural writing skills, and they also help teachers and yeah. Good artsy creative things. So donate, and definitely visit the Time Travel Mart.

SAM: Wait, can we donate?

MATT: Tonight we can't donate here.

MARISHA: We can't donate tonight yet?

MATT: It's not available yet. Start saving your money.

SAM: Not yet.

MARISHA: But you can still go to the Time Travel Mart in Echo Park and you can also go to their website, 826LA, and I'm sure you can donate through there if you want to do that.
Part I

MATT: Yes, but we'll be getting that going in the near future. So, anyway. Let's go ahead and do a little recap of what happened last week. So the party has been hired by their friend, Arcanist Allura Vysoren, in the city of Emon to head towards the dwarven town of Kraghammer, as a good friend of hers, and one of the members of the Council of Tal'Dorei, has gone missing. This, being a halfling paladin, named Lady Kima of Vord, who was on a vision quest as part of a pilgrimage and was drawn towards some dark evil she said was manifesting somewhere deep beneath Kraghammer and hadn't been heard from since. So the party was sent there to go ahead and seek her. Upon arriving in Kraghammer, shenanigans ensued. They made some friends, made some enemies, wandered the town. Brother, sisters, walked around as if they were married.

LAURA: No!

(group laughs)

MATT: Bears almost got into fights in rings. And eventually the party made their way towards the bottom ring of Kraghammer proper, talking to Lord Nostoc Greyspine, who is--

ORION: That's right, Greyspine.

MATT: Yes, Greyspine indeed. Who is the head of the Greyspine Mines at the bottom of Kraghammer, where supposedly this paladin disappeared to. After having a conversation with him, a bunch of goblins and ogres began to spring from the mines and attacking the workers. The party swooped down to aid, realized that the goblins and ogre's weren't attacking, they were fleeing from something else, of which emerging from within the mines proper some strange naga-based hydra-ish abomination. The party then proceeded to slaughter it, final blow dealt by Scanlan via lightning bolt.

SAM: Hi, Scanlan here, hi.

MATT: Our resident gnome bard.

TRAVIS: Yeah, you did!

MATT: And that's where we pick up. So, as all of you are still riding the adrenaline of the battle, Scanlan feeling the tingling in his fingers as the little bolts of arcane energy kind of (imitates electricity crackling) spark throughout, the rest of the nearby workers and miners slowly converge in and begin to walk up to the party. And someone starts, "That was great, that was well done! "Fantastic! "Where'd you learn that?" One of them comes up there, "Ah, I could've done "better than that." And they start just shouting off at each other and pat each other on the back. A few moments of this progresses before, all of a sudden, there's a hush comes about the crowd, and you see about five or six Carvers pull their way through, Carvers being the guards of Kraghammer, with Lord Nostoc Greyspine himself stepping through. He looks at the rest of the group and goes, "All right, so you've certainly proven yourselves in battle."

ORION: Well, of course we have. I'm sorry.

MATT: "I would like to continue this conversation that we had back in my office if you don't mind." He turns around and begins to walk back.

MARISHA: Oh wait, Nostoc. He's not even listening, he's just walking off.

(group laughs) Yeah, mmm. Ooh, shall we turn and follow?

LAURA: Are you still an eagle? Can you even talk to him?

TALIESIN: Shouldn't you just go caw?

MARISHA: Well I'm not an eagle. But I am still poisoned.

LAURA: Oh, I can help you.

MARISHA: Oh, that'd be great.

LAURA: Yeah!

LAURA: Hold on, I'm gonna go up, and I'm gonna cast--

SAM: Cast? Yeah, I can cast spells.

SAM: You can cast?

LAURA: I can. I've got plenty o' spells.

LIAM: You can kill?

SAM: All right, fair enough.

LAURA: I'm gonna cast Protection from Poison on Keyleth.

MATT: Okay. Essentially go ahead and make a saving throw with advantage. This'll be Constitution.

MARISHA: I made the second one.

MATT: What'd you roll?

MARISHA: A 10. Plus my constitution which is two, three, thirteen.

MATT: So thirteen?

MARISHA: Yes.

MATT: That'd be enough. So, after you finish casting the spell, you feel the poison leave the rest of your body. You can kind of take a breath to yourself. The rest of the miners kind of look about and Awkwardly staring back at Nostoc as he walks off, kind of looking back like, what "Are you gonna go? "Talk to him?"

SAM: Yeah, I guess we should go follow him.

TALIESIN: We have two very important questions. TRAVIS: Can't we look in the hole a little bit more.

ORION: No Grog, we need to go do this.

LAURA: We're gonna go in the hole in just a minute, Grog.

ORION: Then you can smash, you'll be fine.

TRAVIS: You promise?

LIAM: You did that last night. We need to take care of business. Let's go talk to the man. I'm sure it's going to lead back to the mines.

MARISHA: To the hole.

LIAM: Yes, to the hole. Everything's back to the hole.

SAM: Percy, do you have something to say before we go?

TALIESIN: Well, this is good. We have to find out what that was, and we have to see if he'll finally give us some of that ale, I think are the two most important things.

LAURA: It was wine, I believe.

SAM: No, it was bloody, bloody beer.

LAURA: Bloodline. Bloody wine, blood wine.

TRAVIS: Bloodier, ale. Beerwine.

MATT: It was delicious is what it was.

TRAVIS: It was really good.

LAURA: Let's go talk to Nostoc.

SAM: Let's follow him, let's follow him.

TALIESIN: Okay, this is what's important.

MATT: All right, so as you head back to the ramp that heads up from the mine enclosure itself to the top of the realm, which is where the Greyspine Industries mining facility is, you are brought into the building again, brought back to Nostoc's office, in which he's not sitting, he's kind of pacing behind his desk, waiting for you as you approach. As you enter the room, he stops pacing, turns around, puts his hand on the desk, and says, Please, enter and close the doors behind you. (loud thud)

ORION: Sorry, I didn't mean to slam the door like that.

(group laughs)

MATT: "A flatulent dragonborn, eh?"

(group laughs)

MATT: "All right." So as you close the - (laughs) Tiberius. (Orion clears throat comically)

SAM: Sir Greyspine. Lord Greyspine? Mr. Greyspine?

MATT: "Lord Greyspine is fine."

SAM: Lord Greyspine, yes. Why have you summoned us here? Is it to tell us information about what just came out of your mine, I hope.

MATT: "Well let's be clear." "We dwarves don't need help from outsiders. "We can handle our own business just fine."

LAURA: Of course.

MARISHA: Speaking of outsiders, you wouldn't happen to have seen a Lady Kima, would you?

MATT: "As what the discussion was based on previously, "you're searching for her, and last we saw her, She went down into the mine."

LAURA: We already talked about that, Keyleth.

TRAVIS: Yep, we did.

LIAM: They don't like her, she was a troublemaker and she went in.

TRAVIS: You're an eagle.

LAURA: She's in the mine. We'll go in and find her. Right? Lord Greyspine?

MATT: "You're welcome to. "As far as I know, she's down there somewhere. "Hopefully still in one piece."

LAURA: While we're there, would you like us to take care of any other problems?

MATT: "Getting to that. "You see these small intrusions have been bad "for meeting our quotas with the Bronzegrip metal warehouse "and export shipments. "Employees have been forced to "collapse a non-negotiable portion of our tunnels "to prevent incursions like this. "Without my approval. "And this is a pattern I wish to stop at once. "Thus, I have a proposition for you. "Now, I will give you free reign to our mines. "I shall get the proper approvals to make sure no Carvers "bother you as you wander the city's lower ring. "And I will contract you to delve past our tunnels "and investigate the source of these creatures, "where they come from, where they live, "and if there is some sort of a leader "who gives them their commands. "Eliminate them. "For this, I will reward you with not a trifle sum. "25,000 gold pieces. "Plus 250 gold per beast scalp you provide upon returning."

LAURA: Ooh, I like this.

ORION: Grog, this seems like a wonderful job, doesn't it?

SAM: Money is wonderful. We like money. But we've been charged to find Lady Kima. We need assurances that we will find her or at least some evidence of her in the mines.

MATT: "The brazen halfling bitch went in there "without my approval and wandered into the mines, "not to be seen. "So if she is down there, I hope she's in one piece. "I can't guarantee it. "But if there's any place to find her, that's probably it."

LIAM: We're the group of adventurers for you. I don't know if you've heard of the heroes Emon, who just recently- I'm sure you've heard something. Word travels fast.

MATT: "Not beneath this mountain, it doesn't, of human closers."

LIAM: We've just done a lot of good to the ruler of Emon.

MATT: "Great. How does that help us dwarves?"

ORION: We're saying we are going to help you, too. And everything will be fine, and we'll all be happy.

LAURA: Well, we've discovered, in our past adventures, however, is that every realm seems to be having trouble with the same sort of creatures, coming up from the Underdark perhaps?

LIAM: All we're saying is, help us help you. What exactly have you seen before this day? More of the same? Or other creatures?

MATT: He sits back for a second. "The types of creatures, I do not know. "I mostly deal with the business "and just know that there's some bullshite going on "down in the mines. "You could ask our foreman, Hieris. "He's dealt with the cleanup each time "we've had an incursion like this, "so if anyone has information on what these creatures are, "he'd be the one to talk to."

LIAM: Sorry, what was his name again?

MATT, SAM, LAURA: Hieris.

MATT: "He's a foreman at the mine proper."

LAURA: All right.

TALIESIN: I think this seems like the sort of job we'd want to take.

LAURA, ORION: Yes.

TRAVIS: Will we get paid for the monsters and creatures we've already slayed?

MATT: "This deal was not sewn in yet, so no."

TRAVIS: Oh.

MATT: "But we thank you for your aid." TALIESIN: It is customary in our culture to seal a deal with a drink.

TALIESIN: As I think you are all aware.

LAURA: Truly, truly.

LIAM: See, I wasn't just fucking with you last week.

(group laughs) That's a thing we do.

TALIESIN: And since we are about to risk our lives...

TRAVIS: I forgot you did that.

MATT: Make a persuasion roll.

TALIESIN: Yes! Happily.

TRAVIS: Roll good, it's the first one.

LIAM: Come on, Percy!

TALIESIN: 14.

LAURA: Oh.

SAM: It's pretty good. Not great.

MATT: You can see this long, distant, angry, dwarven, mistrusting stare. Rubs his chin, his well-kept, blackened beard and goes, "Huh, but a sip, as it was a gift."

LAURA: Yes!

SAM: (laughs) We'll take it. He pulls the ale barrel which you guys provided, sets it on the side of his desk with the same spigot that you had placed in when you presented it earlier and says, "Take a bit." "A bit."

LAURA: (whispering) Put some in a bottle.

ORION: We have to save some for those guards.

LIAM: Let me take care of it. I'll pour everyone a glass.

LIAM: Oh, thank you, brother. I take my empty water flask that I emptied out before, and am smiling and pouring glasses and also squirting a little bit here and there as I want. I start to just play a little ditty on the flute. I thought we could accompany our sip with a little bit of music, not to distract you, just to--

(group laughs) just to sort of accompany us.

MATT: His nose squints at the sound. (SAM imitates a jaunty flute)

MATT: "Gnomish tunes aren't to my ears and liking." However, you do get an inspiration dice.

LAURA: Yay.

MATT: All right, so go ahead and make a - (laughs) Make a sleight of hand check on this.

LIAM: Okay. That's what we do, right?

LAURA: Roll well. Here we go. LAURA AND

LIAM: Oh, no.

SAM: You have inspiration dice.

TALIESIN: Inspiration dice are d8?

MATT: Yep, you add a d8 to it as well.

LIAM: Okay, and I can add a d8 to this?

MATT: Correct.

TALIESIN: The ale is that good.

LIAM: Oh good. Now I'm at 19. (Travis groans in relief) Hey.

MATT: As he's listening to the gnomish music and kind of pushing it away with his hands, like, "Stop, I don't- no. "I appreciate it, but I don't."

SAM: All right, there's not accounting for taste.

MATT: As you do that, your wineskin goes to full. (imitates liquid sloshing) Swollen to its brim. You switch over to one of the cups, you pass around the drinks. All of you manage to get your drinks passed around.

LAURA: Huzzah!

MATT: "To a contract!"

TRAVIS: Aye! Huzzah!

TALIESIN: To a contract.

MARISHA: Contracts.

SAM: L'chaim!

MARISHA: Love contracts.

LIAM: Is that Draconian?

SAM: It's Gnomish.

TALIESIN: To risking our lives. For money.

LAURA: How old is Nostoc? Just out of curiosity.

MATT: It's hard to tell. Dwarves live quite a long time. He would be equivalent to like a human forties. Dwarven time, somewhere in his mid-hundreds.

MARISHA: Smells like its been in the barrel for a hundred years.

ORION: It has been.

LAURA: This is excellent.

LIAM: Tastes like two buck Chuck.

(group laughs)

ORION: Oh, I know him from Quimdendale.

TRAVIS: What do you know of a Ballsac up in the tavern?

MATT: "I'm sorry, what?"

TRAVIS: Do I have that right?

LAURA: Ball, ball -

MARISHA: Balgus. GROUP: Balgus.

MATT: "Ah, Balgus, that's the brand of what you brought me."

SAM: You know what, I think we asked about him last time.

LAURA: I think we did.

ORION: Also, may we take a short rest before we leave this facility?

MARISHA: Yes, could we do that? Is this considered a short rest?

LAURA: Oh yeah, that actually would be good.

MATT: If you'd like to do that, that would just be taking a short rest outside, probably not in the office proper.

LAURA: Understandable.

MATT: You can leave and just sit down and get some rest.

LAURA: When we take a rest, can I look for Hieris?

MATT: You can as well. So, while you guys are taking a short rest, you're able to use any of your hit dice to heal up naturally.

TRAVIS: We don't naturally heal up?

MATT: That is your natural healing. Not to full. It's a continuation, Grog.

SAM: I will sing a song of rest. And it goes a little something like, ♫ Scanlan make you feel good ♫ ♫ Scanlan make you feel real good ♫

ORION: Oh, I feel so good.

SAM: No wait, you get an extra d6 on all your heals.

TRAVIS: I appreciate the slow jam.

MATT: Yeah, on every hit dice, you get an extra d6.

TRAVIS: R. Kelly would agree. (Matt laughs)

LAURA: I didn't take any hit points. I'm at full health.

MATT: So you got a slow jam just for the sake of the slow jam.

LAURA: That's right. And it was great.

MATT: All right, roll an investigate check.

ORION: It feels good. Real good.

LAURA: Okay. Oh, 25.

MATT: A brief discussion with a few of the other wandering dwarf miners that are in the outskirts of the buildings' facilities. Eventually it leads you over to what is a small, secondary building maybe 200 yards off from the main property. That apparently is where Hieris resides and keeps watch over the entire establishment.

LIAM: I've tagged along.

LAURA: Knock knock knock.

MATT: All right, the rest of you going with her?

SAM: Yeah, we'll go with her.

MATT: Why not! Why split the party? So the group makes their way over to the outskirts of the building. Opens up and a very nice, portly looking dwarf with a big tuft of a chinstrap beard. Big reddish, ruddy nose. Leather apron on. And he opens the door. "Aye, hello! Nice to meet you. What can I do for ye?"

LAURA: Hi. You must be Hieris?

MATT: "I am, I am. Foreman of this here fine mine."

LAURA: Wonderful to meet you. I've heard wonderful things about you.

MATT: "Oh, have you! From who?"

LAURA: Uh, from Lord Greyspine himself.

MATT: "Really? Oh. All right. "Well, how can I be of service?"

LAURA: We were curious. I'm sure you witnessed all of those wonderful goblins and trolls and other nonsense coming out of the mine.

MATT: "Aye. Nasty lot. It always makes my weeks "that much more interesting."

LAURA: Weeks? So this has been happening for quite a while?

MATT: "Unfortunately, at least five or six."

LAURA: And what kind of monsters have you been dealing with?

MATT: "Terrible kinds." He starts rubbing his chin for a little and goes, "We generally deal with the occasional goblin den "we stumble across when opening new tunnels. "That's part of the norm. "Other nasty underground beasties. "However, over this past few weeks, "we've seen some real nightmarish things slither "out of the shadows. "Many goblins stitched together, "like some kind of ball of screaming green lint.

SAM: Ooh, god.

MATT: "Slimes and oozes that would mutate "and change color rapidly before seeming to dissolve "on their own. "Unstable-looking really, in their form."

SAM: Like a goblin centipede? (Laura, Liam, Travis laugh)

MATT: "If you will, aye aye."

ORION: Sounds more like some type of necromancy magic.

MATT: "Perhaps, but they're not undead, per se. "They're still alive. "At least from what we can tell. "Whatever agony face them in their physical form.

ORION: Oh, that's even worse.

MATT: "We even had one brief run-in with what looked "like a duergar that had swollen and sprouted eyes "and mouths all across his body. That was a sight."

SAM: What's a duergar?

LIAM: That's a dark dwarf. They're little fuckers, those are.

MATT: "Aye, duergar." And he spits to the side. "Filthy lost souls. "Dwarves of old that turned to a darker god. "Thankfully, they live far beneath the mountains, "and usually far north enough to not worry about it. "But one of them found its way up here, "in this strange, awful, maw-covered form. "It was terrifying. "And the smell! "Oh ho ho! "Anyway, we've even seen a few creatures from the surface "that normally aren't found down here as well, "which is strange. "They don't wander down. "Something's bringing them. "Weirdest thing." "Oh! And I just heard we had some weird, many-headed serpent thing that just got killed down there.

LAURA: Oh, we just killed one of those.

MATT: "That was you!"

LAURA: Yes!

TRAVIS: Our hero is right over here.

SAM: (clears throat) Hi.

(group laughs)

MATT: And he steps onto his back leg, shifting his weight, and cocks an awkward eyebrow. "Really?"

SAM: I'm really strong for my age.

ORION: We were all surprised.

TALIESIN: We're as surprised as anybody.

TRAVIS: Fearsome Scanlan.

SAM: Actually, Hieris, I have a question for you. You know the mines very well, yes?

MATT: "Aye, I do."

SAM: Far from asking you to draw us a map, are there any tunnels or directions that we should avoid or particularly head towards? Anything that we should look for in terms of traps or tricks?

MATT: "Not within our mines. "They're usually well-guarded. Or, they were."

ORION: Also, do you have a map?

MATT: "Of the mines? "Yeah, I do."

ORION: Wonderful.

MATT: He starts going through his notes here.

ORION: I'll take that.

SAM: That's where we're going, right?

TRAVIS: We're goin' in the hole.

MATT: It's kinda haphazardly scrawled across a piece of parchment, but he hands it over to you.

MATT: And he says, "So that's the front part of the mines. "Unfortunately, half of our tunnels have been "relinquished to close off some of these beasties "coming through, so we're gonna have to recarve portions "of the mine as we progress forward. "Kind of starting at square one best we can. "But that at least is what we're currently working with. "There is a subterranean level as well. "We have an elevator inside "that brings the various mine carts to and from."

LAURA: Is there a particular area on that map that most of the baddies seem to be coming from?

MATT: "No, we've closed it off each time."

LAURA: Just kind of everywhere?

MATT: "Oh no, we've had a few tunnels they've come through, "but we've managed to collapse those "and make sure they're not coming through again.

LIAM: And we noticed the, I believed it was the naga we fought, it seemed to have several extra heads stitched on. Have you no knowledge of these creatures? It seems very odd. Is there any connection in dwarven history or past? Or this is totally out of the blue?

MATT: "No no, not to my knowledge, at least. "I mean, most beasts we find are in one piece, "not several together. "It's a bit disturbing to be honest. "I told my nephew about it and he was crying for hours." LAURA and

MARISHA: Oh.

ORION: (laughs)

TRAVIS: Do any of the beasts go back into them?

MATT: "Oh no, we've killed them as they come out each time." Right, they don't take anything back.

MATT: "Not from what I've seen, no."

MARISHA: Hieris, do you know if there's any other entrances into the mine? Any old secret tunnels, something that someone could be using to get in?

MATT: "Not to the mine, this is all proprietary. "This is the business we run, so we don't have any internal "or secret entrances. "That would leave us open to a sort of a thief to come in and steal our mithril."

LIAM: And what's security like on the mine? Is there any chance someone could've slipped in through Kraghammer without you knowing, or is that all locked up?

MATT: "Oh, I highly doubt that, not with "the way our carvers are trained."

LIAM: Understood, understood.

LAURA: They are quite--

MATT: "That's what I'm talking about.

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: "Fine dwarven study."

TRAVIS: Before we go--

LAURA: Strong ale.

MATT: "Finest of military classes, aye. "Proud of 'em."

TRAVIS: What do you use for the--

MATT: "I had a cousin who was once a carver. "Raised him there. "His whole family brought him up on that side. "Military weapon training every day. "Couldn't come out and play with the rest of us. "I felt bad for him. "But he grew up to be a right nasty dwarf, aye."

LIAM: You say had.

LAURA: Where is he now?

MATT: "Unfortunately, he was slain in one of the incursions. "That duergar I was telling you about. "But, such is the nature of the fighter, I suppose."

LAURA: A damn shame. I'm so sorry.

MATT: "I appreciate that. "To be honest, he was kind of a bastard, but um-- "don't miss him too much. "But I appreciate the thought. "That's very kind of you."

SAM: We won't avenge him then.

MATT: "I mean, still avenge him."

LIAM: Literally or figuratively?

MATT: "I'm not sure.

TRAVIS: He had parents.

MATT: "He had parents. "We were related somewhat. "I'm not gonna say too closely."

LAURA: Can I ask a question?

MATT: "Ah, yes."

LAURA: Not to you, to the other guy, Matt.

MATT: Ah, yes.

(group laughs)

MATT: Yes, Laura?

LAURA: When we take a rest, do we get our spells back for the day?

MATT: Not a short rest. It has to be a long rest.

LAURA: All right, cool.

TALIESIN: Which is why we're gonna take a proper nap.

LAURA: We're gonna take a real nap?

TALIESIN: I think we should go buy some potions and take a nap.

LIAM: I think so.

LAURA: All right, this could be really bad. I mean, we're about to put the dungeons in Dungeons and Dragons.

TRAVIS: Let's go get drunk and go to sleep then.

LAURA: All right.

MATT: There you go.

TALIESIN: And stock up on some potions. Hieris, you've been so helpful.

MATT: "Of course, I'm happy to."

MARISHA: One last question.

MATT: "It doesn't have to be last. "You're welcome to stay as long as you like. I don't get visitors to often up here in my booth."

MARISHA: You should come drink with us at the tavern.

MATT: "Oh well, I have to stay here. "Work, at least for the next six hours."

LIAM: All night, do you get off in six more hours?

MATT: "Aye. "But I have some dried fruits. "I've got some meats inside. "I've got two chairs and you could fit in my lap," and he kind of pats you on the head.

SAM: I've killed.

(group laughs)

MATT: "Right."

ORION: This one needs a whore, sorry. (Sam grunts)

MATT: "Fair enough." Also, apparently my mic's a bit loud. If you can turn it down a bit for you guys.

LIAM: What's a mic?

MATT: "Forget that, you heard nothing. "It's a strange echo in the caverns of Kraghammer. Anyway--"

TRAVIS: Look at the time.

LAURA: We have to go. We'll come see you again, Hieris.

MATT: "Of course, anytime. "When we're not busy. "But when I'm not busy, you're welcome to come by."

ORION: All right.

MARISHA: Oh, that'd be nice.

LIAM: Tell you what, when we drag our asses out of that mine, we'll come straight to you and buy you a drink.

LAURA: And we'll have some of that dried fruit.

TRAVIS: We're lying, right?

MATT: "Oh, I'll save a batch for you, you half-elf lass."

LAURA: All right.

LIAM: Do the wink thing you do.

LAURA: I did, I already did.

LIAM: Oh, you did it already. She's good at winking.

MATT: "I saw, it was a good wink. "Aye. Made me tingle in my shoulders." TRAVIS: Just your shoulders?

MATT: "That might be the diabetes, but--"

(group laughs)

MATT: "But mostly the wink, I think."

TRAVIS: Good.

MARISHA: Oh, we should get him something other than dried fruit. That's not good for diabetes.

TRAVIS: Back to the tavern.

TALIESIN: At least it means he's regular.

TRAVIS: Or did you have something?

SAM: No, we're good. Back to the tavern. We go back to the Iron Hearth Tavern, right? Is that what it's called?

MATT: For those who are asking, that's West Country, is the accent.

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: Cornwall.

LAURA: What time is it? Should we buy potions now?

TRAVIS: If we're underground--

LAURA: Oh, is everything open?

MATT: As far as you guys know, it's somewhere in the neighborhood of sunsettish afternoon.

LAURA: Are the stores still open?

TRAVIS: It's summer.

MATT: You can certainly check.

SAM: It's like La Vegas, it's always twilight. TRAVIS:: There you go.

ORION: If you all don't mind, I suggest we item up a bit, and before we get too late, and we get too drunk, Grog, go back to that lightning -- main-- manor-- lightning cage.

LAURA: Oh, that place.

MATT: House Thunderbrand?

ORION: House Thunderbrand. (Matt laughs)

TRAVIS: Where do we item up? Do we get potions and stuff somewhere?

LAURA: Yeah, that's what we're looking for.

LIAM: When you say too drunk, do you mean "we" the adventurers or the humans back in Los Angeles?

ORION: Both parties. Cross-plane.

MARISHA: Cross-Realm.

ORION: And I tell them what happened, again.

SAM: What happened?

ORION: Well, I went to this door because--

SAM: Oh yes, yes, yes, yes.

MATT: You later rested, shot arcane magic at the home of arcane magic in Kraghammer.

ORION: And if we are to go down into this cave, perhaps they have some insight into what's going on there as well. Especially at this point in.

LAURA: Let's hurry and try to get them before they go to sleep.

MARISHA: Maybe they have magical items. I want stuff.

ORION: And I priorly had luck with more than--

TRAVIS: Like plant stuff or potion stuff?

MARISHA: All stuff.

LIAM: Have you had any luck finding an arcane--

LAURA: That's what we're talking about.

LIAM: No, I know that. Did you send any fireballs at doors again like you've done in the past, or--?

ORION: Yes, I knocked, as I do often do. And nothing doing.

LAURA: All right.

LIAM: Got it.

TRAVIS: So, magic stuffs.

LAURA: Let's go find them.

TALIESIN: All right.

MARISHA: So wait-- it seems like they really don't want you in their door. It seems very heavily guarded. So what's our plan, we just going to try again?

LAURA: Well it was nighttime before. Maybe they'll be more--

SAM: We're gonna do what we always do: wing it.

TALIESIN: We're gonna try it again, except we're gonna watch this time. It'll be fun.

MATT: There you go.

MARISHA: Let's do it.

LIAM: I walk back to the door, because we're all just standing outside the door.

MATT: Correct.

LIAM: I walk back to Hieris's door and knock on it and poke my head in. Hieris, I'm sorry.

MATT: You catch him with a handful of dried fruit, "Hmph! "Hi!"

LIAM: Just a quick question. We have no fucking idea what time it is. Because we usually use the sun. Do you know what hour it is? Are businesses open at the moment?

MATT: He reaches over and grabs this really awesomely intricate piece of clockwork on his desk. It's this brass, cylindrical piece that as he pulls out you hear this (tongue clicking), fring! And springs and things making strange whirring sounds. "Oh, I reckon it's about two hours from sunset."

ORION: Oh, very good.

LIAM: Are the stores open at the moment?

TRAVIS: Better question.

MATT: "As far as I know, aye. "Depending on the store."

LIAM: How much time do we have left?

MATT: "Few hours."

LIAM: Oh, thank you, sir.

MATT: "You sure you don't want to stay?"

LIAM: Let's go shopping.

TRAVIS: Thank you, Hieris thank you. Oh, gotta go, sorry.

MATT: "Goodbye."

MARISHA: It's the mine that never sleeps.

MATT: "Good luck."

LIAM: Byeee!

MATT: You hear the door open behind you, and he starts waving at you guys. "Stay safe!"

TALIESIN: Stay regular.

MARISHA: Eat some veggies! Fruit's bad for the diabetes!

TRAVIS: Oh, I put my head back in the door, and I throw him a turkey leg and a beef jerky stick. I gotta get rid of this stuff. It's been in here for years.

TALIESIN: The fact that you just checked your inventory for that worries me.

TRAVIS: We gotta lotta shit in this bag.

MATT: The bag of holding, not so much a freezer.

TRAVIS: I didn't say it was good. I just want it out.

MARISHA: And then you just throw it at him?

MATT: The mildly rotted turkey leg (imitates moist impact) across the floor. The remainder of what was once meat, now a slush sloughing off the bone as it slams across the stone floor.

TRAVIS: It's really tender.

LIAM: You're a goliath, you'll eat anything.

TRAVIS: Yeah, those are the best parts.

MATT: You see he immediately steps back and his face squints back.

MARISHA: That's not polite, Grog.

TRAVIS: I gave him a turkey leg.

MATT: "It's the thought that counts." As he closes his door.

ORION: Hold, hold on. Before he does that, I cast prestidigitation, and I clean it up real quick.

MATT: Okay, that's really kind of you.

ORION: And I hand him a parchment and go, if there's anything wrong, just write the message on this, and we'll come help. If there's any emergency. And I hand him a parchment from the Scroll of Telescription that I made.

MATT: "All right. Thank you kindly."

LAURA: How many pages is that scroll? Is it endless?

ORION: I made like 15 tickets right now. And it takes me an hour to craft.

MATT: He takes it from you with trepidation. You can see he probably hasn't encountered dragonborn often, and he's like, "Thanks."

ORION: Remember, dragonborn, we're good.

MATT: "Right."

ORION: So long. And I leave.

MATT: "Thank ye." Closes the door.

LAURA: Do you want to go with him to the enchanting place or do you wanna go somewhere else?

LIAM: I think I will go with him just to keep him from setting fire to the entire city.

LAURA: All right, shall we all go to the manor?

TALIESIN: We have time, we might as well.

ORION: Are we iteming up first?

TALIESIN: I figure we do that after.

LAURA: I think we'll do that.

MARISHA: I'm gonna go ahead and turn into a squirrel and hide in your pocket.

LAURA: I like it.

MARISHA: Okay.

LAURA: Ugh, Grog.

TRAVIS: What, it was a burp!

(group laughs)

MATT: Technically in character.

TRAVIS: Much worse from the other end, I guarantee.

SAM: Okay, so we're going to House Thunderbeards? Thunderbirds?

MATT: You guys head to the House Thunderbrand.

SAM: Brand.

MATT: All right. So, Tiberius leads you to where it's residing. Once again you come upon what looks like a very out of place, very well-kept green lawn that stretches for a good 60 feet before you see this really beautiful-looking alabaster and gold building, slightly domed with these four towers to each corner, with these blue pointed crystals on top of each tower.

LIAM: How does the grass grow down here?

LAURA: Can we see any traps or glyphs that are active?

MATT: He points out to you as you approach, there are a series of stone sigils carved into the stonework that surrounds the exterior of the lawn.

ORION: Those things!

LAURA: Can we look around and see if there's any way to, a bell to ring that's outside of that area.

MATT: Go ahead and make a perception check.

TALIESIN: Can I assist on that?

LAURA: Yeah, please do, 'cause I rolled a one. One, baby.

TALIESIN: It's a 10.

LAURA: I failed it hard, I failed it.

TALIESIN: If you rolled a one, there's nothing I can do anyway.

MATT: What'd you roll?

LIAM: We ain't found shit.

TRAVIS: She rolled a one.

MATT: Rolled a one naturally?

LAURA: I did.

MATT: Best you can tell, stonework's pretty solid.

LAURA: Cool! Hey, it's a house.

MATT: Yeah.

MATT: There are dwarves around. No.

TRAVIS: Good.

MATT: As you look about, it's hard to tell the nature. This looks just like a lawn with a well-framed stone exterior.

LAURA: Cool.

MATT: But there's no fence. There's nothing keeping you from walking into the lawn and towards the building.

MARISHA: Can I do a nature check to see what light source is making all this grass grow, or if it's like magical growing?

MATT: No nature check required. There is no light source, other than the green rocks that generally permeate the interior of Kraghammer to give its kind of strange luminescent atmosphere. This kind of dull red glow that's around the entire city. Other than a couple of sparks of lantern light. There's no light source.

SAM: I wonder what Keyleth is doing. She's squeaking an awful lot. (Marisha imitates squirrel)

LAURA: Oh that's right, she's in my pocket. Hi!

TRAVIS: So we just walk up and--

LAURA: Can I pet her little head.

ORION: No, I don't suggest that, Grog. I shoot firebolt.

MATT: I forgot that wasn't water. (coughs)

TALIESIN: Did you actually try to walk up?

LIAM: Is there a front door?

TALIESIN: Perhaps you should, before you do anything. Just try and walk up.

MATT: From what you can see, There appears to be a large, almost like beachwood, Light wood double door in the front of the compound.

LAURA: Grog's gonna go.

LIAM: I'm gonna use my rogue abilities to walk up to the front door, and knock on it.

ORION: Great.

LAURA: Sorry Grog.

TRAVIS: I have one job. To take damage.

LIAM: Can I see if I detect a bell?

MARISHA: Is that a talent you picked, is that a feat?

MATT: So, you walk towards the grass. You step onto the walkway that leads towards the front of the building. As soon as you cross into the threshold where those stone sigils are, you make a dexterity saving throw. (Travis laughs)

LAURA: Oh no. Roll well, my brother.

LIAM: This is really not good for their business. [LIAM and LAURA groan]

(group laughs)

LIAM: 12.

MATT: 12.

LAURA: Oh no.

MATT: So, as you pull your cloak around you and take a few steps to jaunt upwards, suddenly there's, you guys hear it. The strange (tongue clicking) sound, and a poof, poof of arcane blue energy kind of, just pulses around his feet. You instinctively begin to pull back, but as you do, there's a blast of blue electric energy that (imitates explosion), streaks out from all around you, shocking your body and throwing you about 15 feet back, straight onto your shoulders. You (imitates grinding) skid to a halt (imitates thud).

LIAM: Which one of these do I roll for damage?

TRAVIS: Electrified sound effect.

MATT: You take...

LIAM: Higigigigi!

MATT: 14 points of lightning damage.

LIAM: All right.

ORION: This is as I'm paused telling him not to do that.

MATT: Yes.

ORION: Don't!

TRAVIS: Should've let me go.

MATT: Your muscles eventually relax.

ORION: As I was about to say, that was going to happen.

TRAVIS: We have a flying carpet.

LAURA: Hey, we have a flying carpet! We have a flying carpet.

ORION: Let me try one thing that I didn't think to do last time. I'm gonna cast Dispel Magic on the runestone.

LIAM: Don't tase me, bro.

MATT: Okay. Go ahead and--

TRAVIS: It's really not that bad.

MATT: Let's see.

LAURA: Pull it out.

TRAVIS: What?

LAURA: Pull out the flying--

MARISHA: Phrasing.

SAM: Going for the handbook.

MATT: Yeah, so we know what's going on.

TRAVIS: Oh, the magic carpet, hold on.

SAM: Guys, don't forget to subscribe to Geek and Sundry.

LAURA: Oh yeah!

ORION: Oh, and I cast it at my fourth level slot.

TRAVIS: You wanna fly it up to the door?

MARISHA: What are you casting?

ORION: Dispel magic.

MATT: All right, make an arcana check.

LAURA: It can't carry you, you're too heavy.

TRAVIS: I said you, not me.

LAURA: Oh, gimme that flying carpet.

TRAVIS: That's what I said.

ORION: 13.

MATT: 13?

ORION: Yeah.

MATT: Okay. As you concentrate and these kind of shimmering bands of arcane energy wave off your hands toward the enchantment, they impact and dissipate without effect.

ORION: Are they fourth level or higher?

MATT: They seem to be.

ORION: Fuck.

LAURA: I hop on the flying carpet.

MATT: Okay, so you pull the flying carpet, Mary Poppins-style, out of the bag of holding. (imitates soft thud)

LAURA: Yes. And see if I can fly up and over to the door.

TRAVIS: Do you wanna tie a rope around your waist in case it goes bad?

ORION: It's a flying magical carpet.

LAURA: Somebody. Oh. Is that bad? Is that a bad idea?

TRAVIS: No, do it.

ORION: It's a flying magical carpet.

SAM: What could go wrong?

MARISHA: I think you'll just, like, hit a wall.

LAURA: What if the flying carpet gets ruined?

SAM: Let's not do that then.

TRAVIS: Oh my God, really?

LIAM: It's not gonna be ruined.

MARISHA: Wait, wait, wait, I'm in squirrel form. So I go out.

LAURA: Oh, and you're with me. Let's both fly to the door.

LIAM: I have nine healing potions--

SAM: Hey, hold on, hold on.

TRAVIS: What what, you turned invisible and walked inside a house last time.

SAM: Yeah, I can do whatever we want. Do you want me to knock on the door, is that what we're trying to do?

LAURA: Oh yeah, use your--

SAM: Okay, so yes. I send an unseen servant to knock on the door.

TRAVIS: What kind, like a buddy?

LAURA: Oh, he tried it before.

MATT: Where do you create the unseen servant?

SAM: Where do I create it?

MATT: Yeah.

SAM: Right on the doorknocker. Like, hanging on the doorknocker.

TRAVIS: Feet touching the ground?

MATT: All right. So the distance unseen servant can be summoned--

LAURA: Oh no.

MATT: I believe you may be able to actually summon it within the boundary of those arcane sigils.

TRAVIS: I'm just sitting back here holding the carpet. ♫ I can show you the world ♫

(group laughs)

MATT: 60 feet, so yeah. You go ahead and you walk up to where that sigil is, you finish your spell, you cast unseen servant.

SAM: ♫ Unseen servant, ho ♫

(group laughs)

MATT: Which he says every time.

SAM: Yes.

MATT: Every single time. You see this strange shift of air as some sort of humanoid form then materializes in the opposite side of this boundary and stands at your ready and command.

SAM: We still haven't knocked on the door, correct? GROUP: No.

MATT: It's about a 60 foot walk.

SAM: I command the unseen servant to (imitates knocking)

MATT: It kind of saunters over. You guys see this kind of shifting, barely, barely visible form make its way up to the front door. In the distance, you hear a dull (knocking). Eventually, the door slightly opens. And you see a hunched figure with bright white, chalk-white hair, kind of look out the doorway, "Oh, where's he come from?" Looking at the form in front of him.

SAM: Oh, the ghost.

MATT: Yeah. "That's where you come from. All right."

SAM: Hello!

ORION: I'm waving. Hello.

MATT: Opens the door, comes out. You now see this dwarven figure hunched, very, very old, with a long, very, very well-crafted brass staff, looks like a black or purple gem at the top. Spectacles at the tip of its nose. And it begins to kind of shift its way over towards you. (breathes heavily)

ORION: Watch out for that rune. It's still on.

SAM: I think he knows that. (laughing)

MATT: Eventually making its way.

TRAVIS: He's coming towards us?

MATT: Yes. Walks right to the edge of the sigil. Puts his hand up, and the unseen servant vanishes. He goes, "So, you have my attention."

ORION: Well, it's a pleasure to meet you. My name's Tiberius Stormwind, and these are my friends.

MATT: He puts his hand up and there's no sound coming out of your mouth. (Travis laughs)

SAM: Maybe we should listen.

MATT: "This is the one who would-be attacked our home abode not more than a few hours ago."

SAM: He has emotional problems.

MATT: "Apparently. He needs to learn respect for other people's property."

LAURA: Yes, he does.

LIAM: We agree wholeheartedly. He's dragonborn, he's weird. He's a little weird. We're sorry to interrupt. I don't know, it's dinnertime, I think. I don't know if you've heard yet, it just happened. We just fought some sort of many-headed beast down at the mines, and Lord Greyspine is sending us in. So before we go, we were sent here. We were told you were the dwarf to speak to if we needed--

LAURA: To know about the magical entities.

LIAM: I think it was just to get shit. (Travis and Sam laugh)

LIAM: To get ready for those entities.

MATT: "If you're looking to but trinkets and magical oddities--

LAURA: Trinkets!

MATT: "You've come to the wrong place. "This is a house of study. "This is where hardworking dwarves of arcane persuasion "put their lives towards pursuing--

TRAVIS: Say something!

MATT: "--the magical forms and fields that--

SAM: And we have come to seek your knowledge.

MATT: "I'm sorry." Your sound is back.

ORION: That's what I'm trying to say is that I came here looking to ask about the arcane studies. I'm extremely interested in that. When I heard that your house Was the only one that was in that particular study, I was immensely intrigued. I respect the arcane arts so much that it's, well, it's been my life. And right now, we're in bit of a situation where we have to go slaughter a bunch of nasties in apparently one of your mines. And we don't know the source. And it appears to be of an extreme arcane nature of the dark sense, and I figured we could come to you for help and some kind of guidance. And I will-- Scanlan, will you stop it! And it appears that you very well know something that we could learn from, with all due respect, of course.

MATT: Make a persuasion check.

MARISHA: Holy shit. What the fuck. Breathe.

ORION: 11.

TRAVIS: God, what is with these rolls?

TALIESIN: We've been middling.

LAURA: Terrible rolls today.

MATT: The dwarf gives you a disapproving brow shift and goes, "Look, I mean no disrespect. "But understand, this is a dwarven house "of arcane practitioning and study. "Don't see any dwarves among ya. "I think our business here is concluded." "If you're looking to buy stuff, we produce "and sell through the Value of Valor house of sale."

TRAVIS: Oh Tiberius, can't you become a dwarf?

TALIESIN: Of course, sir, we completely understand if you're not up to such a challenge. It makes perfect sense, and we'll be more than happy to go and buy some wares somewhere else if this is too much for you.

MATT: "Bah! Challenge."

ORION: I will send you my associate. The dwarf turns around and begins walking away with his staff.

LAURA: What a beautiful staff that is.

ORION: I'm gonna cast Alter Self on myself to be a dwarf.

TRAVIS: And jump behind me, and act like you just--

LAURA: Actually sir, we do have a dwarf with us.

MARISHA: No wait wait wait! Cast it on me! I'm a squirrel in her pocket.

ORION: Oh shit, I cast it on her instead. (loud thudding)

LAURA: We have a dwarf with us who wanted to actually say hello to--

TRAVIS: (whispering) What's your dwarf name?

MATT: Turns around. Saunters back.

ORION: Keyleth, where have you been?

MARISHA: I guess it's Keyleth.

MATT: Looks at you.

TRAVIS: Keyleth Kraghammer.

SAM: You better fucking speak dwarvish.

MATT: Smiles for a second as he looks at you and goes, "Ah, how nice to meet you. "Where are you from?"

MARISHA: (bad Scottish accent) Oh, hello.

(group laughs)

LAURA: Oh, shit. (Liam speaks in Swedish-accented gibberish)

SAM: Ya, from Sweden.

TRAVIS: I'm gonna choke on a chip. (coughs)

MARISHA: Keyleth is not good at this.

LIAM: Roll with it player, roll with it.

MARISHA: I hail from the mountains up north.

ORION: She had an accident on the way over here. We were hoping maybe--

MATT: Roll a persuasion roll with disadvantage. (all talking and laughing)

MATT: You. Roll with disadvantage.

LIAM: Let the dice act better than us tonight, please.

(group laughs)

TRAVIS: (high-pitched voice) Oh, hello!

MARISHA: Wait, persuasion--I don't have--oh, wait. I have a zero. Eight.

MATT: That's your first roll. Now roll again.

MARISHA: Oh, I have advantage.

MATT: No, you have disadvantage.

MARISHA: Oh, disadvantage. So eight.

MATT: Eight. He goes, "I've been practicing the arcane arts "for over 250 years.

MARISHA: And I've been practicing my Cornwall accent for five minutes. Shit.

MATT: He raises his hand, and the Alter Self spell dissipates. Where stands Keyleth.

SAM: Oh Keyleth, you've been lying to us this whole time? (Travis laughs)

ORION: Who are you?

SAM: We thought you were a dwarf.

LIAM: Vax steps forward, steps in front of Keyleth and says, Good sir dwarf. Clearly we are idiots. We are--

MATT: "That's the first true thing you've said "since you've called me out of my home."

LIAM: Stay with me on this. We are strangers in a strange land. However, we are working with Lord Greyspine to empty your mines and end the evil that is spewing forth from them. Now I know that we are a bit stupid--

(group laughs) --in a number of ways.

LAURA: But we fight well.

LIAM: But we fight well, and we have the best of intentions, and when it counts, we're there. We just need a little bit of help going into the mines. And again, Lord Greyspine himself sent us, so please excuse my-- TALIESIN: Cornwall?

LIAM: --challenged friends.

TRAVIS: My cornhole friends.

LIAM: We're here to help. I promise.

TRAVIS: That's a very Disney moment.

LIAM: Wink, wink, wink.

LAURA: I wink twice. Make a persuasion roll at disadvantage.

LAURA: Can I assist him 'cause I winked?

MATT: No.

LAURA: Damn it.

TRAVIS: It's a powerful wink.

MATT: It's a powerful wink, but not this powerful. Not the way this conversation's been going.

TRAVIS: Yeah, apparently not. Oh hello!

LIAM: Best roll of the night. I rolled a 20 and a 17. So 19.

MATT: 19. He glares at you two and goes, "I've said my piece. Good luck to you all."

(group groans)

SAM: Further.

LAURA: If you had gotten the 20.

LIAM: How about a chocolate-covered mallomar?

SAM: I'm gonna have one more try at this.

MATT: He turns around and starts walking away.

SAM: There must be so many arcane things down there that we will discover and bring to you upon finding them.

LAURA: Good call, Scanlan.

SAM: Things that you could use for your research. Historical items.

MATT: As he's still walking away, you hear him shout over his shoulder, "And when you bring them, then we'll talk!"

SAM: Okay, that's fair.

MATT: "Till then, good day, and don't bother me when I'm eating."

LAURA: Thank you, Lord Thunderclap.

LIAM: This game has consequences.

MATT: At which he shouts again at a booming, booming prestidigitation voice, "It's THUNDERBRAND!"

LAURA: That's what I meant.

MATT: You hear the door slam, boom!

TRAVIS: That was fun.

SAM: That was great!

LAURA: Should we go buy some potions then?

TALIESIN: Yes, let's go buy some potions.

SAM: He gave us a little bit of information. The valve of valva, what's it? Valor of -

TRAVIS: Vulva?

SAM: The place to place to go buy potions.

ORION: The House of Valor.

SAM: No, the valva--

ORION: It's not the House of Vulva, Scanlan.

MATT: The Value of Valor. LAURA AND

SAM: The Value of Valor!

TRAVIS: If you want to visit the House of Vulva, you and I can go later but not now.

LAURA: The Value of Valor, let's go find that.

ORION: (in Marisha's bad accent) Let's go to the North.

MARISHA: I'm sorry. I didn't think about the fact that I was gonna have to do an accent. I'm not good with that stuff.

LAURA: It's okay, Keyleth.

TRAVIS: Women, fighting, ale, that's my job.

MATT: So after a bit of discussion, you manage to make your way around town. You eventually find your way to the Value of Valor, which is a--

LAURA: Terrible.

MATT: (laughs) It's a stone building. Like reddish brick, it looks in construction. With fine purple--

LAURA: Please be open, please be open, please be open.

MATT: (laughs) Fine purple tapestries in the front that show various battles of old dwarven history of two glowing enchanted permalight lanterns hanging from the front.

TALIESIN: Classy.

MATT: And an entryway that is currently open and a warmly-lit interior welcomes you.

TRAVIS: Awesome.

LIAM: So easy.

SAM: Hey, before we go in there and just make asses of ourselves, As a group, what do you think we need to get down into these mines?

LAURA: Potions.

TALIESIN: Healing potions.

SAM: Healing potions. Some light sources--

ORION: We don't need that.

SAM: Climbing anything?

LAURA: I have climbing gear.

SAM: I have some climbing gear, but--

LAURA: That's included in the dungeoneering kit, right?

MATT: Yes.

SAM: Oh, what about something for breathing?

SAM: Like what if we get trapped down there with no air?

ORION: Don't worry about that.

LAURA: She can make plants, and we'll get plenty of oxygen.

MARISHA: Oxygen's good, although if we have something to help with poison, that might be good. Can we get some antidotes?

LIAM: Vex. How much gold do we have at the moment?

LAURA: That is a wonderful question, brother.

ORION: By the way, I pull out a bottle of air. Just an empty bottle and go: and plus, we have this.

LAURA: We will more than double our gold if we take this mission.

TRAVIS: So we got like 24,000 gold pieces?

LAURA: Less than that.

TRAVIS: 23 thousand.

LAURA: Less than that.

TRAVIS: 22 thousand?

LIAM: More than double, that means it could be one thousand. 'Cause anything is more than double.

LAURA: I don't like sharing.

TRAVIS: Math is stupid.

SAM: All right, we go into the House of Vulva.

MATT: All right.

SAM: Open your vulva!

MATT: That's not what it's called.

(group laughs)

TRAVIS: Are you sure you don't wanna think about renaming it now?

MATT: It's the Value of Valor guys, come on! (whines)

MATT: All right, so.

TALIESIN: You're tearing the party apart.

LIAM: Tearing me apart, Lisa.

MATT: A giant boulder falls out of nowhere and crushes Grog.

(group laughs)

MATT: So you make your way inside. Suddenly, hit with the smell of heavy incense and jasmine. This is the equivalent of a Psychic Eye Bookshop.

ORION: Groovy!

MARISHA: Oh, we were just there.

TALIESIN: We were just there.

TRAVIS: Nag champa.

MATT: You walk inside. There's not a lot of folks inside looking about the establishment. But there is one person sitting at the front desk, which is a beautiful long oak table with a red trim that hangs to the ceiling. Not a dwarf, actually. What you see there appears to be an elven individual, sitting at wait, hair pulled back behind the ears. Very, very slight, thin build. And smiles as you enter and says, "Welcome to my establishment, may I help you?"

LAURA: We both stand a little taller, and try to look more noble.

LIAM: Hello.

MATT: "Yes."

LIAM: It's a beautiful shop you have. It's so startling to find an elven establishment here in the middle of Kraghammer. How did this come about?

MATT: "Well. "They didn't have one." (Travis and Sam laugh) "And I found there was perhaps money to be made "in starting one. "I've been here for over a hundred years."

TRAVIS: Oh sh-- Are you guys that old?

LIAM: No, we are not.

ORION: So business is good?

MATT: "Dwarves have a hard time "buying from those who are not dwarves. "But I've made my established connections with business individuals. "So, what can I help you with?

TALIESIN: We're in the market for some healing potions to start with.

TRAVIS: Yep, yep.

MATT: "Of which intensity are you looking for?" TRAVIS:: Level three for this one, please. Two.

MATT: "So looking for a superior healing potion."

TRAVIS: Yeah, superior.

MATT: "I've only got two of those currently."

LAURA: They're expensive, Grog.

MARISHA: We don't have Pike, though.

MATT: "I can sell you the two superior healing potions."

MARISHA: I'm still not feeling well.

MATT: "Those will run you 1,500 gold pieces each."

TRAVIS: Fuck! Really?!

TALIESIN: This is why you buy medium healing potions.

MARISHA: On second thought, I'll just read some books tonight,

TRAVIS: I take damage fast.

MARISHA: Refresh myself on my healing spells.

LAURA: Can I ask your name?

MATT: He gives you a keen look and says, "Tremaine."

LAURA: Tremaine.

TRAVIS: Oh, here we go. (Liam and Taliesin laugh)

MARISHA: It's what she's good at.

TRAVIS: Everybody take five while we haggle.

LAURA: I'm just saying. We're heading into the mines. We are going to encounter very many arcane objects potentially. In fact, Lord Thunderbrand sent us over here. That's his name, right?

TRAVIS: You got it.

TALIESIN: You did it right.

LAURA: Sent us over here telling us to find his wares here. And we've made a deal with him that if we find arcane objects we could potentially, you know, I lost track of what I was saying, but you get the idea.

SAM: Oh boy.

ORION: What would you suggest? And do you know of any things we should particularly buy before we leave going into the mines and encountering nasty naga-type creatures and other kind of things.

MATT: "Superior healing potions."

TRAVIS: How much are they each, 1,500?

MATT: "1,500 gold pieces."

TRAVIS: I'll take one for me, thank you.

MATT: "Very well."

LAURA: We'll very much like to perhaps make a deal with you, that we'll bring you objects of arcane nature for a discount on your wares.

MATT: Make a persuasion roll.

TRAVIS: Oh shit. I just paid for--

LAURA: Oh, no you didn't. Not yet.

LIAM: Roll, sister.

LAURA: Oh, come on, no whammies, no whammies. Okay, well. 15, hm?

TRAVIS: He's an old elf.

MATT: He says, "And I appreciate this perhaps offer. "Once you return from your mines--"

LAURA: I know, I know, I know.

MATT: "--with these magical accoutrements, you are more than welcome to bring them here, and we'll make a deal.

LAURA: How many dragons have you come across, sir? Are you interested in dragon parts?

TRAVIS: Oh, we have a lot of dragon bits.

MATT: He extends his hand to a shelf on the side labeled, "Dragon Parts."

LAURA: Oh.

(group laughs)

LAURA: Lovely.

MATT: "And to answer your question, three."

LAURA: Oh, really?

TRAVIS: What about basilisk eggs?

LAURA: What kind of dragons, actually?

MATT: "What was your question, sir?"

TRAVIS: We have also, if you're interested in trade, basilisk eggs and parts of an umber hulk.

LIAM: And a troll dick.

TRAVIS: No, that's gone.

(group laughs)

TRAVIS: We flogged him with it and then it disappeared.

LIAM: I detract my offer.

TRAVIS: It was used very well.

MATT: He gives you a very concerned look.

TRAVIS: I'm a collector of sorts.

MATT: Both of you. And he goes, And he goes, "I work in trade, meaning gold pieces for my wares."

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: "If you have interest, purchase. "If not, I have other business to attend to."

SAM: Any other healing potions to buy? Come on people.

LAURA: Maybe a moderate.

LIAM: All right, well friends, we're about to descend into hell itself, so I reckon we should probably pay the price.

TALIESIN: Two moderates.

MATT: Greater. In the new edition.

TALIESIN: Greater.

MARISHA: How much are the greaters?

MATT: "The greater healing potions run 300 gold apiece."

LAURA: Oh, let's get a few of those.

TRAVIS: I need like three of those.

MATT: "So, three?"

TRAVIS: Yeah, three.

LAURA: Do you have any arrows that--

TRAVIS: Well let's do the potions first.

LAURA: Okay okay okay, two for me.

MATT: "So, five."

TALIESIN: Two for me as well.

MATT: "Seven."

TRAVIS: Keyleth.

MARISHA: I'll take one.

MATT: "Eight."

TRAVIS: Tiberius?

MATT: "Anyone else require a moderate healing potion?"

TRAVIS: Tiberius?

ORION: I could take one.

MATT: Pathfinder to 5E.

TRAVIS: Scanlan?

SAM: Well, do we have ours leftover from what we had before?

LAURA, TRAVIS, MATT: Yes.

SAM: Then I'm fine.

TRAVIS: Vax?

LAURA: He's Vax.

LIAM: No, I'm good actually.

LAURA: He's Vax.

TRAVIS: Oh, my intelligence is six.

LIAM: I'm so fast I don't really use them that much.

TRAVIS: So nine.

LIAM: You'll get to that point as well.

LAURA: Nine potions then.

TRAVIS: Nine times 300, work that out.

MATT: As he pulls up his arcane calculator.

LAURA: So 2,500 for all nine then.

TALIESIN: It's an abacus, God, abacus!

TRAVIS: I believe it's 2,700 gold pieces?

LAURA: Why would you do that? I was trying to make him--

MATT: "It is 27."

MATT: He says, "Impressive for a goliath. "I don't mean to assume, but in my experiences, "your kind is--

TRAVIS: It's Professor Grog, actually.

ORION: All right, calm down.

MATT: "2,700 gold pieces for your nine greater healing potions."

LAURA: All right, 27. Do you have any arrows that perhaps have magical properties?

ORION: Enchanted arrows is what she's asking for.

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: He kind of glances over his shoulder and says, "Ah, we haven't had much a request for arrows in a while. "We have bolts for crossbows, as that seems to be the staple "for the carvers of the city. "I have two sleep arrows, perhaps, if that is "of interest to you."

ORION: Yes they would be, very much.

LAURA: And what would you charge for those, sir?

TALIESIN: Ooh, I should build some interesting arrows.

MARISHA: You should.

MATT: Arrows. (whispering and muttering)

MATT: "That would run you 250 gold per arrow. "I have two currently."

LAURA: All right, all right, I'll take 'em.

MATT: "All right, 500 gold. "With that, that is a total of 3,200 gold pieces."

TRAVIS: Scanlan, underwater breathing or air, oxygen supplies?

ORION: Dear sir, have you happened upon any--

TRAVIS: Ask with your fancy talk.

ORION: --relic or artifact around here, or heard of something called the Pale Stone?

LAURA: Sorry, you have to watch us buy things.

ORION: This is a rare artifact I've been looking for for quite some time.

ORION: I figured an environment like this might lend to something.

LAURA: What is it a mess you've made?

MATT: "I don't believe I have, but should you come across one, "I would be interested to have a look."

ORION: Oh, you appraise?

MATT: "If you don't mind."

ORION: Very good.

SAM: And do you have anything for adventuring underwater or for helping to breathe in tight spaces?

MATT: "Mm, potion of waterbreathing, I do happen to have."

SAM: A potion of waterbreathing?

MATT: "Yes, I do."

SAM: How much?

MATT: "I have four of them available, "and they run 500 gold apiece."

SAM: Jesus.

TRAVIS: We'll take it. We got all this platinum I forgot about.

SAM: Take one, two, one?

LAURA: Don't say that!

TRAVIS: He can't hear--

ORION: I don't need one. I bring out my bottle of air. And I go, "I have this." And I put it back in.

SAM: I'm okay as well. You want one, Grog?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

SAM: All right, we'll just take one of those.

TRAVIS: Just one?

SAM: Well, I don't need it. He doesn't need it.

TRAVIS: We'll take two.

SAM: Two.

MATT: "1,000 gold. "That brings us to 42,00 gold."

LAURA: Wait, 42?

MATT: "Yes."

LIAM: Have you any elven gear for a son of Syngorn?

LAURA: Are you taking it off of your pot now?

TRAVIS: Yep.

MATT: He gives you a keen look and goes, "We don't get many requests for this, "but I think this may fit you." And he reaches below and pulls up a fine piece of mithril chain, elven in make.

LAURA: That's what I'm wearing.

MATT: Mm hm.

TRAVIS: Show-off.

MATT: He says, "Would you perhaps "be interested in this elven chain?"

LIAM: It's beautiful. I am a bit of a light-footed one. Would it suit me?

MATT: "Hm. "Chain does make a bit of a racket. "Might not recommend it, unfortunately."

LIAM: All right. I'll pass.

TRAVIS: You couldn't buy it for me?

LAURA: It won't fit you, it's for elves.

LIAM: You're gigantic.

TRAVIS: Could go on my pinky or something.

LAURA: All right, cool.

LIAM: Could fit on your left nut.

LAURA: Well, thanks.

TRAVIS: That's an important nut.

MATT: He goes ahead and accepts your gold. Go ahead and mark off 4,200 gold for those.

LAURA: I did already.

MATT: All right, very well. "Thank you for your patronage. "I look forward to hopefully having you back "when you return with whatever artifacts you manage to find."

TRAVIS: Thank you, you're very nice.

LAURA: Big expensive artifacts.

TALIESIN: I say, you're one of the most charming people we've met so far down here.

TRAVIS: And it smells pretty in here.

MATT: "Well of course, they come in rare ordinance in this city, it seems." You hear under his breath a little bit of a mutter. Apparently it's like elves don't like dwarves, it's weird.

TRAVIS: Do we sleep before we get to go kill shit?

TALIESIN: We're gonna go sleep.

TRAVIS: Well can we go do that?

LAURA: Let's go sleep and then get up in the morning and go down and kill things.

TALIESIN: And I'd love to do a crafting roll right before I go to sleep just to put together a little thing.

MATT: What would you like to put together?

TALIESIN: I'd like to try and build a bolo arrow, a trapping arrow.

TRAVIS: Yeah!

MATT: Interesting, okay. As you guys head back to the inn where you've rented rooms for the week,

TRAVIS: You clever fucker.

MATT: Which would be at the Iron Hearth Tavern.

TRAVIS: Is Ballsack in there? When we walk in?

MATT: Balgus is not in the tavern, no.

TRAVIS: He's not?

ORION: He's Balgus, Grog.

MATT: No, sorry.

TRAVIS: Really?

MATT: He's got a home.

TRAVIS: Yeah, but doesn't mean he have to go to it.

MATT: True.

LAURA: I walk Trinket down into the storage area that he can stay in.

MATT: [bear noise] Trinket goes down begrudgingly.

ORION: Damn it.

LAURA: I look around for something that can look like a pillow for him.

MATT: You find a couple of sacks of grain that can probably work.

LAURA: I put them down and make them comfy for him.

MATT: Okay, you think they're probably not gonna last the night with those bear claws. But you don't care, it's not your grain.

LAURA: That's fine. Also, I feed him.

MATT: Okay, Trinket is very happy. (imitates bear eating) Tears into some meat. You guys make it back to the tavern for an evening's rest. For you--

TALIESIN: Not a super complicated thing, but, you know, I've gotta--

MATT: Go ahead and make a Tinker's Kit roll.

TALIESIN: What am I rolling with my Tinker's Kit? I've never done this before.

MATT: For this, I would go ahead and make it an intellect modifier to your roll.

TALIESIN: Intellect modifier?

TRAVIS: Rock that shit, Perce.

TALIESIN: And I'm spending my bonus die as well.

LAURA: Oh, we have bonus die, don't we? From Scanlan.

TALIESIN: Thank God, because I rolled really badly. 10.

MATT: 10? You spend and toil away for the next four or so hours trying to find a way to get this trigger to work. Twice you nearly sprain a finger. You manage seemingly get it to function, then the arrow itself splits and shatters. You can see there being something to it, but this night it's not gonna come to you.

TALIESIN: I'm gonna have to try again later. Okay, that's fine. It's on the list. That was a terrible roll.

MATT: It was a terrible roll.

MARISHA: It's been a bad day for rolls. It's been bad day for rolling.

LAURA: Fresh start in the morning.

SAM: Well, tomorrow is the day that it counts, because that's when we begin to crack some heads.

LAURA: When we could die.

TALIESIN: Out with this system, new dice.

MARISHA: To be fair, it's been a long day. I'm still bleeding everywhere.

SAM: Should we rest and get on with it?

LAURA: Let's do it!

SAM: Or should we visit some whorehouses?

TRAVIS: Nah, let's sleep.

SAM: Let's just sleep tonight.

LAURA: Just sleep and go.

TRAVIS: Oh, they're still tired from the other night.

SAM: Oh yes, one of them battered me quite--

TRAVIS: I don't know what this is.

SAM: That's me getting beaten up by a whore dwarf.

TRAVIS: Oh, it's you getting the elbow drop.

TRAVIS: She's giving you the Randy Savage from the bedpost.

TRAVIS: Oh yeah! (crosstalk)

TRAVIS: We're sleeping now.

MATT: All right. So you guys go to sleep. Wake up the next morning fully healed, spells restored, well rested and ready for the day. You think it's day. It's hard to tell. Still, this underground circumstance is really messing with you guys.

SAM: Well, should we go plunder some mines and kill some goblins?

LAURA: Let's do it.

TALIESIN: Let's go plunder some mines.

TRAVIS: So we head down to the mines.

MATT: All right.

TRAVIS: To the hole.

MATT: All right.

TRAVIS: ♫ Takin' it to the hole ♫

MATT: You make your way down to the bottom ring of Kraghammer. To the mines proper. The miners have gone back to work, and from what you can see, there's just an all around crazy business with people cleaning out, still trying to clean out the ichor that's on the ground left over from the battle you guys had the day before. You make your way to the front of the mines, and immediately three of the carvers that are standing at the front approach as you begin to walk, and then upon noticing you, kind of like, step back and put their weapons to the side.

TRAVIS: Yep.

MATT: Acknowledging the orders they received from Lord Greyspine.

LAURA: Oh, Trinket's with us.

MATT: Trinket has come along with you.

SAM: Trinket the bear, Trinket the bear.

LAURA: I just saw that, don't forget Trinket. I didn't forget Trinket.

MATT: I assume Trinket comes with you unless you say otherwise.

MATT: In general.

TRAVIS: Are they especially bowing to Scanlan the snake slayer?

MATT: (laughs) No.

(group laughs)

TRAVIS: No love!

MATT: They're busy working.

MATT: And fair play to the gnome, but they're dwarves.

SAM: Sure.

ORION: Yeah. They see that crap all the time.

MATT: You make your way into the mine proper. It goes back for a good 10 minutes of walking and of winding. You can see the actual track of the minetrack leading around. You come upon a couple of dwarves that look over their shoulders begrudgingly at you guys as you pass going, "Hey? Eh, shh," and go right back into mining whatever remains in the inside of this. It looks like this portion of the mine has been nearly picked clean. The dwarves that are in there are probably just wasting time to get their pay for the day. You go further back and eventually it opens up. I think I have the map available.

LIAM: I've got it right here.

SAM: It's over there.

MATT: Cool.

SAM: Can you put it so that the people can see?

LAURA: Oh, yeah.

SAM: Is that a thing?

TRAVIS: They can't see that.

MATT: We can put it on there perhaps. For the most part I'll be describing it as you go, so it's not too important.

LAURA: Okay.

TALIESIN: Looks like Italy.

MATT: Yes.

TRAVIS: It's a boot.

MARISHA: It's the boot, yeah.

MATT: Following it, you get to a portion of the mine that is very busy. You can see, since this is probably one of the portions that wasn't collapsed in previous incursions buy whatever creatures these were, you get the feeling that this one has basically taken most of their workforce to try and find and carve a new vein. Or find a new path to pull things from. You get towards the portion where all these dwarves are working, and you notice that some of the doors have been shattered, knocked off the hinges. You imagine whatever creatures were barreling through before, this is probably where they came through.

LAURA: All right.

TALIESIN: That's where we're going.

TRAVIS: Make an arcane check. Somebody with arcane.

LAURA: Oh yeah, can I look around? Perception.

MATT: You look around. What are you looking for?

LAURA: I'm looking for, you know.

(group laughs)

TRAVIS: Be specific.

TALIESIN: 15 arcana check.

LAURA: Scratch marks for anything.

MARISHA: I like the idea of magic perception.

TALIESIN: I just wanna see if there's anything familiar about the markings, if I can identify any signs of something mystical that's come through here.

TRAVIS: Like a portal or a prison or a--

MATT: That'd be more of an investigation roll.

TALIESIN: Oh, well, alright.

LAURA: I'm gonna look for tracks.

MATT: Okay. That'll be an investigation roll for you as well.

MARISHA: I'm gonna assist her, look for animal tracks.

LAURA: I'm scared, I don't know which one to roll. Both my die have been rolling so bad.

ORION: I want to detect magic for a while.

MATT: All right. (loud thud)

MATT: Aid roll, Keyleth?

LAURA: This one is no longer in service.

TALIESIN: Oh, wow!

MARISHA: Five.

TRAVIS: Well hers is a lot better.

MARISHA: Good.

LIAM: Sorry, I've got the map, so I'm looking at the mine. Are we still in the dwarven carved out, sort of structure portion of the mine.

MATT: You are. You have just essentially started on that map.

SAM: So let's go down.

LIAM: Guys, I'm holding a map. I see one room that they've scrawled "Supply" on, so it should be the next right up ahead. I'd like to just take a peek in there and see what we can see before we head deeper in.

MATT: All right, you are--?

LAURA: I rolled a one again.

MATT: A natural one.

LAURA: A natural one. Vax and I get dressed up in Sherlock Holmes cosplay, and we say, "Golly gee, I think I see some animal tracks "over here."

TALIESIN: They are staring at their own footprints on the ground.

MARISHA: "The trail's going cold!"

TALIESIN: Following around in a circle.

MATT: Oh man, this has turned completely back from the first game. You guys are failing consistently.

LAURA: Everything.

MATT: Let's turn this around, let's turn this around.

LIAM: Anyhow, I've got a map, so let's use this. Stay on point here.

MATT: You make your way towards the supply room as you head to where it was. One of the dwarves is guarding it. Not a carver, just one of the miners that was hired for this purpose is standing there. Leads you into the door, kind of opening it for you, awkwardly going, "All right, whatever you're looking for, fine. "Go inside." Looking inside, there are just racks and racks and racks of pickaxes, shovels, utensils for the purpose of mining and constructing. There are wooden boards lying down. There are just giant barrels of nails and clipping utensils, and things that are used in the continuous expansion of a mine.

LIAM: I've seen enough. We should keep going.

(group laughs) This map says that there's an elevator a short ways up.

LAURA: That goes down.

LIAM: That goes down. But then there's a railway that goes further in into the caves, so I'm not sure.

LAURA: We should probably go down.

MARISHA: Yeah, I feel like going down.

LIAM: Elevator straight down?

MARISHA: Let's go further, all the way down.

SAM: How many of us can the elevator hold?

MATT: Elevator can pretty much hold all of you guys.

SAM: Okay, let's go.

LIAM: It's a safe assumption that Lady Kima did not just walk to the back of the upper floors, she probably went down.

SAM: Yeah, let's go down, come on!

LIAM: Get shit done, let's go.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: Let's do it.

MARISHA: Get low.

TRAVIS: Air high five.

LIAM: We have a map to the elevator.

TRAVIS: Make 10.

MATT: As you guys are walking over to where the elevator is, you do notice there are two places in the mines where there is just large piles of rubble. And part of the ceiling has collapsed. You can see that there were portions where the mine expanded much deeper into the mountain that were detonated or collapsed in the idea of preventing any further incursion by whatever these creatures are pouring through. You also can see that there are some dwarven corpses being loaded out from the mine below, as well as goblin corpses, individuals that were caught in the attack that happened yesterday before it managed to emerge from the mine.

LIAM: Scanlan, are you all right around these goblin corpses?

LAURA: We should follow those.

SAM: Any goblin corpse is a good goblin, I say. I'm fine with it. I'll just quickly spit on their bodies as they go by.

MATT: And you do so quite quickly (spits). It's rapid, it's amazing.

LAURA: So we follow the corpses and see where they're coming from.

MATT: All right. So that heads away from the elevator.

SAM: No no no, no no no. That's being taken to be buried, let's just keep--

LAURA: No no no, where they're coming from.

SAM: Oh.

LIAM: So we could either go to the rear of the mine on this level and see where they're coming from.

LAURA: I thought we already went downstairs?

LIAM: No, not yet.

MATT: There's a spiral staircase on the map. On the lower right hand side.

LIAM: Yes, I see it.

MATT: That's where they're coming from.

LAURA: Does that lead down probably?

MATT: It seems to.

LAURA: Well then let's take the elevator, whatever. Let's go down.

MATT: All right.

TRAVIS: You should put it under the thing.

TALIESIN: We're good with down.

MATT: You guys go ahead and approach the elevator. It's a large wooden platform with a series of chains. My terrible, hastily drawn map there for you.

TRAVIS: It's kinda crap, but it's kinda great.

MATT: Yeah, I know. It was actually more designed as a DM utensil, but you guys needed a map--

TRAVIS: I love it.

MATT: --so I gave you my map.

TRAVIS: There you go.

LAURA: Take it back.

MATT: So I'm taking it back.

(group laughs)

ORION: Give it to me.

MATT: It's-a mine. No, I'm keeping it. It's all right. So you get back to the elevator. There's a large 15 by 20 platform with a series of chains and there are two dwarves in the back that run a giant iron wheel. As you approach, they kind of give you a look, like, "Well, are you serious about going down?" [Travis, Laura, and Marisha] Yeah.

MATT: "Okay, step on the platform."

LAURA: Let's do it. The two dwarves grab and begin to rotate the giant wheel, as it does you here the winch and the chain begin to tighten as it does. The platform shudders for a second, begins to lower. As it begins to lower, you can feel the actual platform shake a little bit as the whole weight is placed on the chains.

TALIESIN: Guys. We're on an elevator.

MARISHA: This is scary.

ORION: I love elevators.

MATT: As the winch begins to release, it--

LAURA: I pet Trinket, calm him down.

MARISHA: I've never been on one of these before.

MATT: Trinket is a little nervous.

MARISHA: It's really tight.

TALIESIN: I'm on an elevator with a bear.

MARISHA: It's really dark, tight.

ORION: Oh, light! (snaps)

TALIESIN: Thank you.

LAURA: Are we down yet?

MARISHA: Keyleth's getting a little claustrophobic. She's never been in this tight of a space.

TRAVIS: Are you claustrophobic?

MATT: As the light spell bursts out from his staff. You all kind of have to cover your eyes for a second. But the lower area is opened up.

LIAM: Word of warning, Tiberius.

LAURA: Can we see out?

ORION: She said it was dark, and then I cast my spell.

TRAVIS: Yeah, it's what you do.

MATT: (imitates loud thudding) You guys hit the bottom floor. You step off the platform, and you can see there is a secondary minecart that leads from this elevator that curves to the left and leads deeper into the mine proper. To the right of you is the spiral staircase. And you can see now two of the other miner dwarves are dragging a dead body across.

LAURA: Can I look for goblin tracks down here and follow those?

MATT: (laughs) You can attempt another investigation check.

SAM: Why don't we just ask the dwarves where they were getting the bodies?

TRAVIS: You're gonna roll crap. You're gonna roll crap.

LAURA: Don't curse me.

MARISHA: Please don't do that.

LAURA: What am I, what is it? That I add it to?

MATT: Investigate.

LAURA: Perception?

MATT: Investigate. But you advantage on the roll, because you're a ranger, tracking.

LAURA: Oh sweet. Okay.

SAM: Why don't we just ask?

LAURA: Well that's good, okay. Let's go with a 17.

MATT: 17, alright. So as you guys are going to ask somebody about this, your ranger gets down and begins inspecting the floor.

LAURA: Yeah, I see things!

MATT: Where you can see there were struggles that apparently occurred. You can see slash marks on the ground. You can see bodies, or the impacts of bodies where some of these dwarves have been pulled away. A few minutes later, you can see tracks, dwarven tracks, of bodies being pulled and dragged, not in the direction they're going, but further down the tunnel.

TRAVIS: Yeah, let's go there.

LAURA: Oh, no.

MATT: As you look and follow that track, you notice that maybe a good 200 feet to the left of the cavern, there is a new tunnel breach that is currently open. About a 20 by 15 size tunnel that is fresh and blasted out from the other side. You can see rubble and rocks strewn across the floor.

LAURA: I hear, I hear birds coming from the--

TRAVIS: It's a fucking trip, right?

LAURA: I know.

SAM: Let's go down there. Let's go down where it's dangerous.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: Can we see?

TRAVIS: Can we ask one of the guards?

TALIESIN: It's a mine canary.

LIAM: Is it black or is it dim?

MATT: With his light spell, it's fairly bright.

TRAVIS: Nice!

MATT: Otherwise, it's fairly dim.

TRAVIS: I cup my hands over my face and go, Grog, Grog, Grog. (laughs)

MATT: And it does echo. Grog, Grog, Grog, Grog.

LAURA: Why would you do that?

TRAVIS: Why not?

MATT: (faintly) Grog-Grog. Grog. Following the tracks, you can see the dragging of the bodies does indeed go in the direction, and into the newly carved tunnel. In this mine network.

LAURA: All right.

MATT: What you do notice is the dwarves' bodies that are being dragged away: you can see footprints of those that are also pulling them aside. You kind of figure out the idea of the pattern of the footsteps that are leading in that direction.

LAURA: Big, small?

MATT: Most of them are also dwarven in shape.

LAURA: Oh, okay.

MARISHA: Most of them.

MATT: So, there are, you can gather, dwarven feet dragging dwarven bodies deeper inside.

LIAM: Duergar.

LAURA: Dwarven centipede.

LIAM: It's the duergar.

MATT: However, there are two bodies that are being dragged with no footprints whatsoever.

TRAVIS: What?

LAURA: Wings.

SAM: They're being used like skateboards.

(group laughs)

MARISHA: Legolas style.

ORION: Who and what are those?

LIAM: This is 2015.

TRAVIS: Is there any residue?

MARISHA: Yeah.

SAM: Wow, if only we had asked some dwarves what's been going on down here.

LAURA: Is there any residue, blood?

ORION: We already know.

LAURA: Green, red, black.

MATT: From the dragging marks, there is no blood. There's no signs of them dragging dead bodies off, at least.

LAURA: Does it look like they struggled?

MATT: No, there's no struggle either.

TRAVIS: Oh crap, fire.

MARISHA: What about the walls? How close are the walls?

MATT: The walls here for this tunnel are about 15, 20 feet in width. And about 10, 15 feet high.

MARISHA: Are there any scratch marks or anything like that on the walls?

MATT: No.

LIAM: Let's stop dicking around and go into that mine. TRAVIS,

TALIESIN: Yeah.

LAURA: Might as well.

MATT: All right.

TRAVIS: We go further.

MATT: You push further in. (Liam imitates sword being drawn)

MATT: So, this tunnel, pitch black. There's no light source aside from the one that you're creating. You guys push forward. And push forward, following the tracks. And push forward. And the tunnel winds and winds and descends. And winds and descends. About two hours-- [Laura, Marisha, Travis, and Sam] What?!

MATT: --of following this tunnel with little variation.

LAURA: Should've grabbed some dried fruit.

TRAVIS: We got a ton.

MATT: Steadily declining and winding as it progresses. Three hours go by. This tunnel goes extremely deep. Whatever managed to dig its way up here came from pretty far under this mine.

LAURA: At no point does it look like the bodies ever moved?

MATT: Nope, no change in physicality. No sign of struggle.

MARISHA: But there are the drag marks all the way?

MATT: Yeah.

LIAM: And two hours ago, I started stealthing and taking the lead. When we're in the dark.

MATT: All right, go ahead and roll a stealth check.

LAURA: I thought I was tracking.

LIAM: Uh, 29.

LAURA: Whoo, that's a good roll. Yay, first good roll of the night.

MATT: All right, there we go. Your luck is changing now.

LAURA: Changing it around.

TRAVIS: Let me touch you.

MATT: You feel pretty stealthy. You guys look like, wait, where the hell did Vax go?

MARISHA: Oh shit, I hope he didn't hear me just say that about him. Dammit.

LAURA: Oh thank you, brother.

TALIESIN: I'm having a serious Tom Sawyer island vibe.

LAURA: I found him.

LIAM: Looks fine.

MATT: About four hours--

MARISHA: Are there any drafts? Do I feel any wind flows or anything like that?

MATT: No. It is still. It is stagnant air. (Laura coughs) Even more stagnant now. Four hours of traveling deeper into this tunnel's path until--

LAURA: Anybody else have to go to the bathroom?

TRAVIS: He rolled, he rolled something.

LAURA: Oh no, he rolled.

MARISHA: And so, that is how I spent my 12th birthday.

SAM: Great story, Keyleth. And, yeah.

MARISHA: Let's see, what else.

TRAVIS: Hey Scanlan, you kill me, I kill you.

LIAM: There a great little cave alcove here, perfect for peeing in.

LAURA: Oh brother, good to see you.

LIAM: For everyone to pee.

LAURA: Am I over here, or am I over here? Perhaps we could take a pee break here and proceed further into the mines.

MARISHA: I agree with that.

LAURA: That's a good idea.

LIAM: Do you catch my drift?

MATT: As the four hour mark of travel into this tunnel presents itself, the tunnel finally widens and opens. As the sound of distant water rushing reaches your ears.

LAURA: Oh no, I have to go to the bathroom.

MATT: As Tiberius steps into this opening, the light cascades into this new cavern. A large, beautiful open space presents itself, a good 100-foot-up ceiling. From what you can see, a roaring river is now pouring out of the nearby rock, cascading over a cliffside into a waterfall down into this deeper, giant cavernous space.

LAURA: What about the tracks?

MATT: The tracks continue in the direction of that river.

MARISHA: Into the river? Like it goes into the water?

LAURA: Do we want to step into the room fully?

MARISHA: Why don't we send--

LAURA: I'm gonna stealth. I'm gonna stealth, too.

MARISHA: Stealth twins.

ORION: Do I detect any magic? Stealth twins, 2015.

MATT: You detect no magic. You roll stealth.

LAURA: 17.

MATT: Let's go ahead and take a bio break--

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: --as the mystery begins to unveil.

(group laughs)

ORION: I love a mystery.

MATT: Be back here in about five, ten minutes, folks. So keep an ear out.

TRAVIS: Quick, quick break.

ORION: I'm gonna pee my face off. (Liam imitates rushing water)

MATT: We'll be right back.

ORION: Enjoy our butt shots, everybody.

MATT: And everyone runs off to take care of their business.
Break

TRAVIS: Right, listen up. If you have ale, then you have a friend in Grog Strongjaw. A goliath of towering height and size, this barbarian has an appetite for the two-- [audio resets]

TRAVIS: Right, listen up. If you have ale, then you have a friend in Grog Strongjaw. A goliath of towering height and size, this barbarian has an appetite for the two great loves in his life: combat, women, and ale. (record scratches) Wait. Easily the brains of the group, Grog is often consulted for his vast knowledge of shapes, colors, and shiny things. Also ale. In his early years, armed with his two-handed great axe, Grog often enjoyed proving his might amongst the ranks of his family's wandering herd. But after coming upon an unsuspecting, elderly gnome in the woods, he objected to the killing of such an innocent life. A creature of impulse, Grog felt only pity for this, this terrified little thing. [no audio]

TRAVIS: Right, listen up. If you have ale, then you have a friend in Grog Strongjaw. A goliath of towering height and size, this barbarian has an appetite for the two great loves in his life: combat, women, and ale. (record scratching) Wait. Easily the brains of the group, Grog is often consulted for his vast knowledge of shapes, colors, and shiny things. Also ale. In his early years, armed with his two-handed great axe, Grog often enjoyed proving his might amongst the ranks of his family's wandering herd. But after coming upon an unsuspecting elderly gnome in the woods, he objected to the killing of such an innocent life. A creature of impulse, Grog felt only pity for this, this terrified little thing. His disobedience cost him dearly. Beaten bloody and banished by the herd leader, his uncle Kevdak, Grog was abandoned and left to die. Exiled from his herd, it was then that the relative of the very gnome he fought to save, saved him. It was the kindness of a gnome cleric named Pike that healed Grog, bringing him back from death's edge. And they have remained close friends ever since. Most nights, Grog can be found challenging entire taverns to wrestling matches. Or accompanying Scanlan to the nearest house where you pay for lady favors. Also ale.

MARISHA: A first impression of Keyleth would leave you with little information on the half-elven druid. You might even think that her social awkwardness due to her sheltered upbringing is kind of sweet. Of course, it would be unwise to underestimate her based on first impressions. (lightning roars) Under that unintimidating petite frame is a vicious beast waiting to be unleashed, whose natural powers have made even the fiercest of champions pee their pants. Literally. Born to the air tribe of the Ashari people, Keyleth was raised with a deep love of nature and the elemental magics. It is her people's inherent duty to protect the delicate areas in Tal'Dorei, where the four elemental planes begin to bleed with this realm. Since she was a little girl, she had quite a knack for air manipulation and beast shaping abilities. Well, if you consider kittens and flying squirrels to be little beasts, which I do. Anyways, it wasn't long before the headmaster of the tribe, her father, Kohren, realized her true prodigious abilities and she was inveterated to succeed him as the next headmaster. Just like that, her jovial childhood was stripped and replaced with endless spell memorization, teachings from ancient traditions, and exceedingly high expectations. Every druid leader-to-be must embark on a journey to seek out the sister tribes in order to introduce and establish respect amongst the fellow headmasters. They call this the Aramente, or Noble Odyssey. When her father felt she was ready, he set her on the path to truly discovering herself. Not knowing when, or if, she will ever return. As she hikes down the mountain towards Stillben, she meditated on the task ahead. Part of the Aramente is proving yourself a strong warrior, a valiant protector, and a wise and compassionate leader. With this knowledge, one thought plays in repeat in her mind: Is she even worthy?

TALIESIN: Percy was the third child of seven children, born to a noble family who lived far to the north in the ancient castle of Whitestone. With so many siblings to share the burdens of lordship, Percy turned his attention to the sciences, engineering, and naturalism. One day, a mysterious couple named Lord and Lady Briarwood came to court. During a feast held in their honor, the Briarwoods violently took control of the castle, killing or imprisoning everyone who would stand in their way. Percy awoke chained in the dungeon, only to be freed by his younger sister. Together they fled, chased by the Briarwoods' men. As they ran, Percy's sister took several arrows to the chest and fell. Percy kept running, eventually jumping into a freezing river and floating unconscious to freedom. He did not remember waking up on a fishing boat. He barely remembered the next two years, as he slowly made his way as far south as possible. Then one night, Percy had a dream. A roaring cloud of smoke offered him vengeance against those who destroyed his family. When he awoke, Percy began to design his first gun. (gun cocking) (gun firing)

SAM: Oh, you haven't heard of Scanlan Shorthalt? Well, gird your loins, ladies, because he has his eye on you. A talented musician, master of disguise, and dashingly handsome in his own mind, Scanlan sings songs almost as much as he sings his own praises. Born a poor gnome, Scanlan used his endless charm and soaring tenor voice to croon for coin and support his single mother. One day he was discovered by a half-orc promoter and joined Dr. Dranzel's Spectacular Traveling Troupe, where he learned the ways of the world and honed his skills as a bard extraordinaire. A loner much of his life, Scanlan has never quite come to terms with the violent death of his mother at the hands of a goblin invasion. While his years on the road provided many, shall we say, educational experiences with the opposite sex, deep down Scanlan yearns for the one thing he's never known: the true love of a fellow gnome. Still, Scanlan considers himself a lover first, performer second, and fighter distant third. On the battlefield, he'll support his allies but rarely draws blood unless it's to protect fellow gnome Pike. Count on Scanlan for a hearty laugh, a rollicking song, and a twinkle in his eye that melts hearts and makes the females swoon.

ORION: (clears throat) Greetings and salutations. I am Tiberius Stormwind. I hail from a town called Ty'rex, located in the heart of Draconia, from a politically respected family. At the age of 15, I succeeded in passing the Sorcerer's Rite, showing prodigy-like control of my magic. The judges and the Draconian high council were amazed at how powerful my spells were for how long I had been training. At 20 years old, I was the youngest appointed member of the magic guild in Draconian history. For the next few years, I almost went mad from the malaise of being a guild member, as it's rather boring. However, one day I happened upon a chamber, unused for quite some time. In the room were stacks of books and maps of the surrounding cities and areas around the known world. For months I would frequent the chamber and learned of artifacts from legend. After a long period of research, I made a list of artifacts that caught my eye. I brought these findings to the high council and was told that all of the information in the chamber I stumbled upon was either believed to be fiction or unsolvable mysteries and hence were lost forever. I found those answers to be unacceptable. A year later I devised a ruse and managed to convince the city council to lend support in me leaving Draconia on a mission of peace and diplomacy for the surrounding kingdoms. Going from town to town and making friends and allies, in and for the name of Draconia. Being a red dragonborn, I had quite the task on my hands in that respect, but it was exactly what I needed, so I could explore the world and find these artifacts, as I felt the truth was out there. Some may describe me as buffoonish, but I say poppycock to all that. (stammers) I am much sharper than most give me credit for. I just don't pay attention to things sometimes. I've also been known to be rather cunning, loyal, happy-go-lucky, and well, dangerous. I can't help but show my true scales every now and then. But overall, I think I'm quite friendly for a dragonborn.

LIAM: Never entirely welcome in the company of elves or men, Vax'ildan learned at a young age to skip past formality, preferring instead to invite himself in your door. Along with twin sister Vex'ahlia, Vax was born by a chance encounter between elven royalty and human peasantry. Raised by their mother in their early years, the twins were eventually sent off to their father in the elven capital of Syngorn. But their cool reception among the elves there never warmed, and their time in the capital didn't last. The siblings stole away one autumn night and set out on the open road. After a few years of wandering, they eventually decided to return to their mother and journeyed back to the lands of their youth. But instead of finding their childhood home, they returned to a pile of rubble. Their mother was gone, their home burned to ash. Pressing the townspeople for answers, they learned of the day the dragon came. With their ties all severed, Vax'ildan and his sister set out to find their fortune together in Tal'Dorei. An outsider since birth, Vax quickly learned to solve life's challenges in his own particular way, often by sidestepping them entirely. And when his knack for circumventing adversity isn't enough-- (sword slicing) --the way of blades the elves schooled him in more than makes up the difference.

LAURA: Like so many half-elves, Vex'ahlia has spent most of her life suffering the cool reception of a people who don't fully accept her. Born of a human mother and an elven father, who only later in life took an interest in their existence, Vex'ahlia and her twin brother Vax'ildan quickly realized the only people they could truly rely on in this world were each other. It was at the age of ten when the two were taken from their mother and brought to live in Syngorn, the isolated elven city for which their father was an ambassador. He quietly took them in but always kept an icy distance, and after too many years of disdainful looks, the pair decided to leave his indifference behind and set out on their own. Vax took to the cities, stealing small trinkets and learning the ways of the thief, while Vex kept to the woods. She preferred the isolation. Always the keen observer, she learned to hunt and to track, to spy and to shoot. And through a series of fateful events, earned herself a companion in the form of a bear, her own stolen Trinket, to fight alongside her and protect her fiercely. Also, he is adorable and gives expert massages. PRODUCER: And back to you. Welcome back. Thank you for waiting. We've all had our fill of snacks, drinks, and relieving ourselves of the ones we had earlier. So, before we return, we actually want to thank you guys for having all the subscriptions you have. Since we started playing, we hit a thousand very quickly. You guys are awesome.
Part II

TRAVIS: Yeah! So thank you for that. Big round of applause.

TRAVIS: Round of applause. Subscriptions have been awesome. And as such, we have a winner for these evening's event. Hi, Tiberius.

ORION: Sorry everyone. Tiberius has returned. So, in character as always. So, the winner of the evening is going to win both a signed photo of the cast of Critical Role as well as a signed Player's Handbook of D&D's 5th Edition is: (clears throat)

SAM: Visitor.

(group laughs) No, on the backside. The winner is Yareth. Congratulations. Thank you for subscribing and paying attention and being in the chatroom and being awesome. We're gonna go ahead and get your information, and we're gonna make sure that you get our awesome first Critical Role giveaway.

(group cheers and claps) Well done, Yareth. Thank you for coming.

MARISHA: Yareth.

(group repeats Yalreth in funny voices)

MATT: All right. (Marisha speaks gibberish)

LIAM: Enjoy your Player's Handbook 5E.

MATT: (laughs) Hopefully more to come down the road. We'll have more fun things for you guys. So, anyway. So, bringing it back to the game at hand. As you've stepped into this large, cavernous space, you can hear the rush of water as the underground river begins to turn into a waterfall and drifts into a smaller body of water. It's just out of sight beyond this cliff face. Into this open, cavernous area.

LAURA: Oh, we just stealthed.

MATT: You guys also stealthed, and what did you roll for stealth?

LAURA: I rolled 17.

MATT: 17, got it. All right.

LIAM: Oh, less than that.

LAURA: You didn't.

LIAM: Oh, no I didn't, 18.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: You were already stealthed, though.

LIAM: That's true.

MATT: As you guys step into this space, there are sections of large rock, portions of stone that just jut out and block off portions from your view of this area. Giant stalagmites and stalactites that just permeate the entirety of this cavern, which has been long, just building and building with elements drawn from the ceiling, from the waters that flow through. You also faintly see a light source--

LAURA: (whispers) Oh no.

MATT: --behind one of those rock pillars in the distance.

LAURA: (whispers) Should we go check it out?

LIAM: Do we perceive anything in here with us before going that far in, yes?

MATT: Make a perception check.

LIAM: 18.

MATT: 18?

LIAM: Yes.

MATT: You hear a very, very faint sound in the distance. (sharp noise)

SAM: Jesus. (laughing)

ORION: Did you hear that?

MATT: That's not the sound. Tiberius.

ORION: I'm sorry.

LAURA: I have a passive perception of 21.

MATT: Yes you do. You hear a: (clicks tongue quickly)

LAURA: Oh, no.

SAM: A skittering.

MATT: (continues clicking)

LIAM: I might hear spiders.

MARISHA: Oh.

LAURA: Ugh.

TRAVIS: Or crab.

LIAM: Or something.

MARISHA: Making it old school.

SAM: Maybe it's a very faint maraca dance of some sort.

LAURA: What direction is it coming from?

TRAVIS: That would be better.

MATT: It's hard to tell at this point, it seems to be just kind of loosely atmospheric.

TRAVIS: Is the light coming from over the water?

MATT: The very, very faint light you see, no. It's adjacent to the water to the right of you.

TRAVIS: Okay.

LIAM: I think we're dealing with spiders.

MATT: (continues clicking)

LAURA: I think you guys should hang back, and we should stealth over and see how many it looks like we're dealing with.

LIAM: The twins will creep forward.

MATT: Okay. You both creep forward.

LAURA: Trinket stays with the group. Trinket, stay with Grog.

ORION: I'm gonna dispel my light spell.

MATT: Pitch darkness falls upon all of you.

TRAVIS: What did you do that for?

SAM: Because now they don't know where we are.

LAURA: But we can't see anything.

TRAVIS: They're spiders.

MARISHA: While he does that, I'm gonna go ahead and turn into a cave bear.

ORION: Can you not see now?

LAURA: We can see in dim light.

MARISHA: Cave bears have darkvision.

MARISHA: I'm pretty sure.

LIAM: No, dim light only.

MATT: Do they?

LAURA: What'd you turn into?

ORION: It doesn't matter, do you want me to turn it back on?

TALIESIN: A cave bear.

MARISHA: Yeah, subterranean bears, they have darkvision.

MATT: All right. So.

SAM: He can just make light again.

MATT: Go ahead and roll a perception check.

LIAM: Turn it back on.

MARISHA: No, leave it off!

ORION: I dispel it again, I'm sorry.

MARISHA: Fuck! Fuck!

MATT: Light, light light, light light.

TALIESIN: How did you do that?

MARISHA: It's been a bad night.

LAURA: Oh no.

MARISHA: 12 total.

LIAM: Clap on (claps), clap off. (claps)

MATT: As you glance about in cave bear form, you look up and all you can make out is shifting movement across the ceiling.

(group groans at once)

MATT: But it's large. It's not a small creature. You glance off to your left and you look up and you see a second one.

LAURA: Oh no.

TRAVIS: Oh fuck.

MATT: And both dislodge.

LAURA: Oh no!

MATT: All of you hear two loud, cacophonous, thunderous slam sounds-- (imitates loud thudding)

LAURA: Definitely hit light now.

MATT: --on the ground next to you-- (screeching noise)

LIAM: I quickly whisper to my sister, to the boundaries.

MARISHA: And I just go: (roaring noise)

ORION: Light!

MATT: All right.

LIAM: Vex and Vax dance backwards against the walls.

MATT: There is a surprise round.

LAURA: Oh, no.

(group groans)

TRAVIS: Oh God.

LIAM: But I heard them.

MARISHA: I know. (roars)

LAURA: Transform back.

MATT: All right. So you guys are stealthed off to the side there.

LIAM: That's beautiful.

LAURA: I'm on the other side.

LIAM: Look at that fun map.

MATT: There's Trinket.

LIAM: Thank you, Matt, for doing all the work on these maps and shit.

MATT: That's what I do. So there's the water there, rushing off into the waterfall that goes further down.

LAURA: Can I stealth against the other wall?

TRAVIS: Waterfall is where on that map?

MATT: The waterfall is right here.

TRAVIS: Got it.

MATT: So the river kind of pours over, falls into the water below. There are some of these large rock elements here.

SAM: What are they?

MATT: You cannot tell what's beyond this area, which is where the light source is coming from. (imitates thudding)

LAURA: Oh no!

(group groans) (imitates thudding)

TRAVIS: Those look like umber hulks.

MATT: They are.

(group screams) You've had one brief run-in with a single umber hulk in the past.

LAURA: Now we have two. As two slam into the ground beside you, dropping from the ceiling portion.

LAURA: Fudge!

TRAVIS: I have their claws still.

LAURA: Wait, do you guys remember-- (Matt growls and snarls)

LAURA: Do they respond to vibration?

ORION: I cast stoneskin on myself immediately. You don't have that much time, unfortunately. Because they are upon you, it a surprise round.

TRAVIS: Shit!

LAURA: Do they respond to vibration? I forget.

TRAVIS: They responded to something.

MATT: They respond to the something.

LAURA: Can we remember with investigation or insight?

LIAM: Limericks, limericks, they respond to limericks.

MATT: So this one shifts up over there, and this one moves up to there. Gleans past you, as it does not notice you.

LAURA: Yeah, but it's still big.

MATT: This one comes towards you, Percy.

TALIESIN: Damn it.

MATT: Attacking you with each of its claws and its mandibles. The first strike comes at you with a 13 to hit with its first claw. What's your AC?

TALIESIN: Ah, 17.

MATT: You, woomf, just manage to dodge out of the way as these giant-bladed claws sweep next to your face. The second strike comes to you at a 21.

TRAVIS: Oh shit. That hits.

TALIESIN: That hits. I'm going to use a gunslinger's dodge.

LAURA: Gunslinger's dodge.

TALIESIN: Wait, let's see if I can do this. It's not enough, nevermind, so no. I just gotta take it.

MATT: All right, so the claw finds purchase across your torso. (imitates claw slicing) The armor catches most of it. However, the slash does leave an impact on you, as you can feel the taste of iron in the back of your throat. You suffer nine points of slashing damage.

TALIESIN: Oh, okay.

MATT: And just as you pull back the mandibles, time to crunch down upon you. And that is going to be a 27 to hit.

LAURA: Oh, no.

TRAVIS: Do their eyes do something?

MATT: You take 14 points of slashing damage, as the mandibles slice down, clamping onto your shoulder. You manage to pull free, but in doing so, you wrench the pointed portions of the mandible across your shoulder, pulling open the flesh in this horrible jagged pattern.

TALIESIN: Ow.

MATT: That brings us to the other one, who is attacking Grog.

MARISHA: Grog! You're right there in front of it. The biggest and most viable visual it can find.

SAM: ♫ No motherfucker, miss ♫ I start singing using my Cutting Words reaction. To try to distract him.

MATT: All right, so go ahead and roll your d8 to reduce his attack roll.

TRAVIS: (laughs) No motherfucker, miss.

SAM: d8?

MATT: d8.

SAM: Three.

MATT: All right. That would have been a 20 to hit. That brings it to a 17.

TRAVIS: 18.

(group cheers)

SAM: I saved your life!

MATT: So, as you begin singing out, as it pulls back with--

SAM: ♫ No motherfucker ♫

MATT: --its mandibles to strike at Grog, it (clicks) looks off to you for a second, goes back, at which point Grog has put his axe up to its face and is holding it at bay. As its mandibles are tied in with its blades, and the handle of the axe is trying to hold it back. It strikes at you with its two claws, Grog. That is going to be a 27.

TRAVIS: That hits.

MATT: And a 14.

TRAVIS: Misses.

MATT: Okay, then from the one claw that gets you, you take six points of slashing damage.

TRAVIS: Okay.

MATT: All right everyone, roll initiative.

(group groans)

LAURA: I'm so scared to roll.

MARISHA: I know, it's been so bad.

SAM: Best one of I've had.

TALIESIN: Ah, not horrible.

LAURA: Oh, good.

TRAVIS: Ball sack.

MARISHA: Uh, it's okay.

MATT: All right, so, 25 to 20?

LAURA: 24.

MATT: 24.

TRAVIS: There you go. A little redemption.

LAURA: That's right.

MATT: Nice, we got some Vex up top. 20 to 15 anyone?

TALIESIN: 17.

MARISHA: 17 as well.

SAM: 19.

TRAVIS: Ah, yeah.

LIAM: 15, 15.

MATT: All right, got some Scanlan up there. 17, 17.

LAURA: (whispers) They're both surrounding me even with my awesome things.

MATT: Percy, Keyleth.

MATT: So 15 to--

LIAM: 15.

MATT: 15.

ORION: 13.

TRAVIS: I'm 14. Tiberius and I are 13-14.

LAURA: Ugh, come on Grog!

MATT: Wait, uh, 14?

ORION: 13.

MATT: 14. Grog and Tiberius.

TRAVIS: It's the ghost pepper cookies.

MATT: All right, cool. Top of the round. Vex.

LAURA: Hyah! I am going to shoot the one.

MATT: Before you do that--

SAM: Oh, shit!

MATT: As you're going to reach back, you look over into its strange, glistening, black, dead, insect-like eyes of the umber hulk, and you feel this strange wave of mental confusion hit your head. Go ahead and make a--

TRAVIS: I knew it.

MATT: Go ahead and make a saving throw. This is going to be charisma saving throw.

MARISHA: Is this what confused you and had you running out the door?

TRAVIS: I fell out a fucking 120 foot hole.

MATT: So you roll d20, add your charisma saving throw at the top of your character.

LAURA: Okay, so I gotta do my math. That's 11, but I get a plus two from my ring that I'm wearing for saving throws, so.

MATT: Okay, so it's 13.

LAURA: 13.

MATT: All right. The wave of confusion takes hold over your brain.

(group groans) We're gonna go ahead and find out what happens. (Laura groans)

TRAVIS: Maybe he'll ask you to make some cookies.

MATT: All right--

LAURA: You're gonna have me do nothing wrong?

MATT: You reach for it, and you space out for a second. Your hands fall to your side. And you stand there.

TRAVIS: Aw, fuck.

MATT: Trinket is looking for some sort of cue from you of what to do.

LAURA: Does he look confused too?

MATT: No, but Trinket's looking to you for some sort of direction and is getting none. This is a very clustered space, too. Can barely see you over this.

MATT: That brings us to Scanlan.

LAURA: But I was stealthed, though.

SAM: Don't worry, I'll help you my dear.

MATT: I know. Doesn't matter if you're stealthed. He couldn't see you, but you could see him.

SAM: I'm gonna take a step back behind Trinket.

MATT: Okay. (Travis Laughs)

LAURA: Good call.

SAM: Actually, wait. How far am I from my furthest--

MATT: Are you averting your gaze from the guys, or are you looking at 'em directly?

SAM: No, averting my gaze. But how far am I from my--

LAURA: Nobody look at them.

SAM: --my furthest fellow? Oh, I'm 60 feet, okay. And I sing my counter-charm song. ♫ Magic magic, go away, come again another day ♫ So all of us have advantage on saving throws for the charming spells. If they are charming us. I don't know if they are.

MATT: This is confusion.

SAM: No, what?

MATT: I don't think--

SAM: Frightened or charmed, it's not the same thing?

MATT: Mm. This is technically a confusion effect. So yeah.

SAM: Okay.

LAURA: Oh, wait. Oh, no.

SAM: Okay.

MATT: So as you finish your song, you're like--

SAM: It did not work.

MATT: Doesn't seem to be having an effect unfortunately.

SAM: Okay. And then as my bonus action, who got hit first? You did? I'll just throw a healing word to him.

MATT: Okay. Just go ahead and roll, feeling him. That's a d4 plus five. Yeah, you got it. Percy.

TALIESIN: Mm.

MATT: You heal--

SAM: What is this?

MATT: It's a four.

SAM: Oh, that's a four. Okay.

MATT: So you heal nine hit points, and it's your turn. What do you got, Percy?

TALIESIN: Up to 58, let me just fix that, there we go. Okay, where am I on the board?

MATT: You are right here in front--

TALIESIN: Okay, so there's no getting away. I'm gonna-- I can basically without-- I remember I'm not supposed to look at these things. I know where this thing is. I can pull my gun and just take a shot, right?

MATT: So averting your gaze, you take a shot. You are at disadvantage on the attack roll.

TALIESIN: How much?

MATT: Just disadvantage.

TALIESIN: I'm just disadvantage?

MATT: Yeah.

TALIESIN: Well okay, that's fine. I'm gonna spend a grit point for a deadshot, so I'm gonna get a plus one to hit.

MATT: All right.

TRAVIS: Come on, Perce.

TALIESIN: Aha! That will be a-- with the plus one, that's a 28, 29, 30 to hit.

MATT: Okay.

TRAVIS: Get after it, nasty!

MATT: Roll again, as you have disadvantage. Because you're not looking at it directly.

LAURA: Ugh, please be good.

TALIESIN: That's still 25 to hit.

MATT: That hits.

TALIESIN: 26, actually.

MATT: Go ahead and roll damage.

TALIESIN: And then I get extra damage because I did deadshot. So that's plus one, so that will be a-- it's a 2d8 plus five plus ice, because I'm hitting with my ice shot. And that's seven, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12. 14 points of ice damage.

MATT: 14 points of ice damage. Nice.

TALIESIN: And then I have a second shot and I'm just gonna take one more shot at him really quick.

MATT: Okay, also at disadvantage.

TALIESIN: I fail. In fact, my gun jams.

(group groans)

MATT: Okay. So as you go to fire, it's like you-- (imitates gun firing) fire the first shot averting the gaze.

LAURA: We're all gonna die. You spin the barrel, go back to go ahead and fire again, as you do (imitates gun clicking) You pull the trigger for a second, and you feel a slight (imitates fizzled explosion) inside the barrel.

TRAVIS: Damn it!

MARISHA: Oh, no.

MATT: And you feel the actual metal get extremely cold, and you have you have to shake it out like, aw, damn it.

TALIESIN: Since I can't move, I'm gonna-- my movement, my minor is gonna be just fixing my-- yeah, so.

MATT: Okay, so your action is just trying to fix the gun?

TALIESIN: Yeah.

MATT: All right. That brings us to--

TALIESIN: Damn.

MATT: Keyleth.

LAURA: Keyleth, don't look at them.

MARISHA: Okay.

MATT: Just as a note, your inspiration dice that you give can be used on saving throws as well.

SAM: Okay. But I haven't given any.

MATT: No.

MARISHA: Um, I'm a bear right now.

MATT: You are a bear, which I will, for the sake of this, give you the kitty.

MARISHA: Bring out Minxie.

TRAVIS: Minxie.

MATT: Minxie is the form, but you are a bear.

MARISHA: Okay, first and foremost, I'm gonna go ahead-- and I don't know if this is gonna help. But I'm gonna throw up a fog cloud.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: Maybe.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: No?

MATT: So fog cloud. The entire space, it's a 20 foot radius? I believe, if I recall from the one he did yesterday.

MARISHA: But it screws our vision, though, doesn't it?

LAURA: Well, yeah.

MATT: Everybody gets obscured vision.

MARISHA: But I mean, we wouldn't be able to see them. Would it help with the confusion is what I'm hoping.

LAURA: That could help, that could help.

SAM: Do your thing. Do what you do.

MARISHA: Or would it be bad?

LAURA: Try it. Do it, Keyleth, go with your instincts.

TALIESIN: Don't think about what's the worst that could possibly happen.

MARISHA: I'm bursting out a fog cloud, and then--

MATT: Well to cast, you have to get out of creature form, remember?

MARISHA: Oh, that's right. I didn't throw a bow.

MATT: So you're a bear.

MARISHA: I'm a bear. Nevermind, I'm just gonna do a full round of attacks.

LIAM: It's go time, go time! (claps)

MARISHA: That one right there.

LAURA: Keep your eyes closed.

MATT: All right, so you move up to there. Go ahead and do your full round of attacks.

MATT: I am doing multi-attack.

MATT: Okay, are you averting your gaze or not?

MARISHA: I'm a cave bear, I'm blind. I'm like a blind fish. I have darkvision and, like, cataracts.

MATT: Darkvision means you can see in the dark.

MATT: But it doesn't mean that you don't see. (Sam laughs)

MARISHA: Well I'm a bear.

MATT: You are a bear. I'm eating at his leg. I'm not looking at his eyes. I'm not, like, waxing poetically at how sexy he is.

MATT: No.

MARISHA: Not whispering sweet nothings in his ear.

MATT: I know.

MARISHA: I'm gnawing at his leg.

MATT: That's true.

LIAM: Go for the kill!

MATT: Make a charisma saving throw.

MARISHA: Make a charisma saving throw?

MATT: Yes. (Travis laughs)

LAURA: Next time just avert your gaze. [Taliesin And Marisha] Oh!

MARISHA: That's good. 16.

MATT: 16? You can feel the oppression of the umber hulk's gaze, but you shrug it off, your bear mind not affected by the measly tricks and traits--

MARISHA: Urgh, I'm a bear!

MATT: -of these strange underground entities.

MARISHA: Okay. Now I'm attacking.

MATT: Roll for your four attacks.

MARISHA: First one probably misses. With my claw, 14.

MATT: 14 misses.

(group laughs)

ORION: She got a pizza.

MARISHA: With the claw attacks, do I have two claw attacks, do I roll for both?

MATT: Yeah.

MARISHA: Okay, so the first one is 19,

MATT: Hits.

MARISHA: Second one, second claw attack is 18.

MATT: Also hits.

MARISHA: Okay. So I am doing 2d6 plus five twice. So six plus--

TALIESIN: It's 11.

MARISHA: Five, so 11.

TALIESIN: Ooh.

MARISHA: Plus 17-- 20 damage.

MATT: 20 damage. Nice.

TALIESIN: 25.

MARISHA: Oh, 25. Sorry, 25.

MATT: All righty.

TALIESIN: Yes.

MARISHA: 25 damage.

MATT: So, as you shake off the effect, you reach for it, lashing out, two large strikes. The second one gets a distinct carve into the back of the umber hulk's hide. You can see a portion of its chitinous back armor gets kind of pulled off in a chunk. And it (snarls), reels back from the impact and readies itself for a second round of attacks.

MARISHA: Me and Trinket.

MATT: There you go.

MARISHA: Going at this. (Matt laughs)

MARISHA: Bear style.

MATT: They go. This one turns towards and moves this way to focus on the cave bear that just thrashed against its hide. While this one turns and moves in towards Grog. But now turns and sees the-- actually no. It stays there, fixed to Grog. So making its multi-strike against you, Keyleth. That is a 26 to hit.

MARISHA: Hits.

MATT: That's mandibles. 17 to hit with its claw.

MARISHA: Hits.

MATT: And 18 to hit with its claw.

MARISHA: Hits.

MATT: All right, so you take six points of slashing damage from the first claw. Eight points of slashing damage from the second claw. And then the mandibles deal fifteen points of slashing damage, as the umber hulk just turns to you, and as a reaction to your assault--

MARISHA: What was the last one?

MATT: The last one was 15. Just unleashes an array of strikes against you. (Matt growls)

LIAM: Hit it in the face.

MATT: That brings us to the other one who's attacking you, Grog.

MARISHA: Back at him, yeah.

MATT: That is a 12 to hit. Pretty sure misses.

TRAVIS: Misses.

MATT: Another 12 to hit, 'cause it likes to roll fours, apparently.

TRAVIS: Give me another four.

MATT: For the mandibles, it's a 20.

TRAVIS: 20 hits.

MATT: You're taking damage, fool. That is 18 points of slashing damage against you.

TRAVIS: I have a half damage to all bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage?

MATT: You haven't raged yet.

TRAVIS: So I'm not raging?!

MATT: You haven't raged yet! It isn't your turn yet.

TRAVIS: But I'm so angry.

MATT: I know. You're about to be so angry.

TRAVIS: 18 points.

MATT: You're gonna be so angry. 18 points of slashing damage. The mandibles crush down on your body, and you can feel them pierce into your chest. Your exposed musculature is then torn in a jagged form as you feel the blood begin to pour down the front of your torso.

TRAVIS: It's all right, it's okay.

LAURA: That's brutal.

TRAVIS: My turn's coming.

MATT: That ends their turn. Vax.

LIAM: So I can see what's up. I saw what it did to my sister, so I'm gonna jump on its back. I'm gonna swivel my daggers around and just stab it in the face.

LAURA: But keep your gaze averted.

LIAM: Yeah, I'm seeing the back of his fucking spine or head. I'm gonna stab him in the face twice.

MATT: Go for it.

LIAM: Okay.

LIAM: Nine-- 20.

MATT: That hits.

LIAM: Okay. So then I'll do damage. The other one's an 18. I rolled in advance.

LAURA: That counts, that counts!

MATT: That one, that's the one!

LIAM: So, 10, plus sneak attack damage, right?

MATT: Yeah.

LIAM: Yeah, okay.

MATT: He doesn't know you were there, you were stealthed.

LIAM: Okay. One. Four. Eight. Nine. 13, 26, 36 damage from the first dagger.

MARISHA: Whoo!

LIAM: Face, in his face, and the next was an 18.

MATT: Not in his face. Not in his face.

LIAM: Not in his face?

MATT: It's back.

LIAM: But I wanted I wanted to do this to his head. Okay, whatever works.

TRAVIS: The reach around?

ORION: The old reach around stabbing.

LIAM: The reach around, the reach around. That what I was going for. And then, where's my four, 1d4. One's a three, but no, just three.

MATT: Three, okay.

LIAM: With my flametongue dagger which I don't know if he likes or dislikes, but that's what I've done.

MATT: Okay, so, as you leap on its back, grab purchase on one of its chitinous plates, bring your first dagger forward and jam it into the side of its head, as it pulls back, you hear a (snarling) as it reacts to the immediate pain and begins to reach one of its claws to try and knock you off. As you do, you put the blade back into your belt, grab with your other hand, pull your other dagger, and slam it into the other side of its head.

TRAVIS: Yeah!

MATT: This time it shrugs you off, and you manage to just land on your feet barely, behind it, still faced away from you. That brings us to Grog. (Travis grunts) Rage.

MARISHA: Rage!

TRAVIS: Now I'm angry.

MATT: Okay.

TRAVIS: I would like to rage, and not only rage, I would like to go into a frenzied rage.

MATT: Okay.

TRAVIS: For three full attacks.

MATT: All right.

TRAVIS: While I'm raging so hard, that I pop all the capillaries in my eyeballs, so I can't really see that well. And I just swing a lot.

MATT: All right, I'm gonna check one thing real fast.

LAURA: Oh, no.

TRAVIS: Oh, shit! Don't check, look, I'm rolling. (Marisha and Laura laugh) 30.

LIAM: There once was a bard from Nantucket.

(group laughs)

LIAM: Who got his flute caught--

TRAVIS: I gain one level of exhaustion with a rage hit.

LIAM: --in a bucket.

MATT: I will say, situationally, because of the fact that your rage that you have advantage on the saving throw against the confusion effect. [Marisha and Laura] Oh. Your mind is so filled with aggression.

TRAVIS: I got that big, like, nasty thing.

MATT: So make charisma saving throw.

TALIESIN: Oh, what a good idea.

TRAVIS: Is that a 20?

MATT: Yep.

LAURA: Plus one.

TRAVIS: 11.

MATT: Roll again, you have advantage.

LIAM: Better, better, better, no.

TRAVIS: Five.

LAURA: Oh no!

MATT: Let's see what happens.

LAURA: No!

ORION: Roll a two.

MATT: So--

(group groans)

LAURA: Now he's raging, too.

MATT: --as you rage--

MARISHA: No, dammit.

MATT: --you feel the influence of the umber hulk's gaze pierce your eyes and the fury fills you, and you reach out and slash with your axe. However, it does not reach for the umber hulk. Go ahead and roll an attack, Grog.

LAURA: Oh no, who's he hitting?

TRAVIS: A one!

(group cheers)

SAM: Finally!

MARISHA: Yes!

MATT: There's a loud clanging sound, as a giant, angry, swooping bladed greataxe misses Tiberius's head by inches.

ORION: Oh! Grog, what are you doing?

MATT: Before slamming into the stone right up against the side of the wall. You can just see now this kind of loose, crazed look in his eye. (growls maniacally)

MATT: Foam begins to gather at the side of his mouth.

ORION: Oh, now you're all screwed up.

LIAM: We have a problem.

LAURA: Yeah, this could be bad.

LIAM: We have an angry Grog.

MATT: Tiberius, you're up.

ORION: Damn it, Grog.

TRAVIS: It's my turn?

MATT: No, that's your turn.

TRAVIS: Oh, that's my turn.

MARISHA: Tiberius, help.

LAURA: At least your rolled a one.

TRAVIS: I did. I didn't hurt anybody yet.

ORION: I look at Grog, and I'm like, will you stop it! I cast Dispel Magic on him. (Travis snarls)

MATT: Cast Dispel Magic?

ORION: Yeah.

LAURA: On Grog?

MATT: Okay.

SAM: I don't think it's magic.

ORION: Yeah, he's being controlled by it.

TRAVIS: He can do whatever.

LIAM: It's more natural, it's creature-based.

TRAVIS: She's also being controlled.

ORION: I know, but you're a big, hulking, crazy mofo.

MATT: No, it is a magical force.

ORION: Yes, it is.

MATT: Forced to make a save.

TRAVIS: Save me, save me.

MATT: Go head and make an arcana check. (Sam and Laura sing along with tense background music)

ORION: Uh, 17.

MATT: 17. The chaotic influence in your brain begins to dissipate, and the rage-filled gaze begins to fill your eyes once again, this time clarifying on the umber hulk in front of you.

LAURA: Thanks a lot, Tiberius.

SAM: Thank god.

ORION: I'm not done yet. I slap him. Just get on this, will you? (Travis snarls)

ORION: I use two SP points to do quickening spell. I cast Grand Column under myself. (imitates rock moving) Fifteen feet up in the air.

MARISHA: Nice. (Orion spits)

MATT: So, the stone beneath Tiberius's feet rises up, creating a column fifteen feet above the rest. He is now raised on a platform. I'll put him right there. Looking down upon the battlefield.

ORION: (clears throat) that is my turn.

MATT: All right, Vex, you're up.

LAURA: Oh, do I have to cast a saving throw or am I fine?

LIAM: Be a badass, be a badass.

MATT: Are you looking at it, or are you averting your gaze?

LAURA: No, I'm averting my gaze even though I'm confused apparently.

MATT: Well, the confusion only lasts one turn.

LAURA: Okay, good. I am not. What's that thingy behind me?

MARISHA: Oh, we've got these.

MATT: This here?

LAURA: No.

MATT: This here?

LAURA: Yeah, what's that?

MATT: This is rock.

LAURA: How high is it?

MATT: This is about 25, 30 feet up.

TRAVIS: Use your laser pointer, dude.

MATT: And this is where the light source is coming from. You can't look over that way.

LAURA: All, right cool. I avert my gaze but I listen very carefully to the sound of where it's coming from. (Taliesin whistles)

LAURA: And I shoot in that direction.

MATT: Okay. (Taliesin and Marisha imitate birds)

MATT: So go ahead and make your attacks against this fellow.

TRAVIS: That's some Hawkeye stuff.

MATT: You shooting this one?

LAURA: Let's do the one that is surrounded so I get like, what, flanking bonus or something.

MATT: For ranged, you would not get a bonus for that unfortunately.

LAURA: Lame. All right.

MATT: So are you shooting at the one behind you? This one?

LAURA: Sure. Okay.

LAURA: No, no, no, no, the other one.

MATT: Okay, all right. So, make your attacks with a disadvantage, as you're kind of keeping your eyes back and shooting in its general direction.

MARISHA: Big money, no whammies.

LAURA: 12, both of them were 12. But plus 11.

MATT: Plus, eleven? Hits.

LAURA: Yes! Oh, and I get two attacks, right?

MATT: You do, yes.

LAURA: Okay. Still disadvantage?

MATT: Yep.

LAURA: 15 plus 11, hits.

MATT: That also hits, yeah. So both attacks hit.

LAURA: Yes!

MATT: Did you want to use your bonus action for anything?

LAURA: Oh yes, Hunter's Mark.

MATT: All right, so you throw Hunter's Mark on this umber hulk there.

LAURA: Yes, I do.

MATT: But you're like, you're my quarry, ugh. Keeping your eyes back. You go ahead and pull your first and second arrow, (imitates bow firing arrows), letting them loose, kind of letting a little bit of faith take your arrows to the wind. Both finding purchase on your foe.

LAURA: Can I use bloodseeking bow on that one?

MATT: You can, yes.

LAURA: Sweet. All right, cool. So that's 15, no, 11. And then 15.

(group laughs)

LAURA: It was good so I kept it.

TRAVIS: She dropped it, but it was a good roll.

ORION: Yeah, take the drop.

LAURA: Plus bloodseeking, which is 10 damage, plus Hunter's Mark, which is a six, which is three.

MATT: So total damage of...?

LAURA: Oh, I have to add. (Matt laughs)

LAURA: 15 plus 11 plus three.

MATT: 26, 29 damage.

MARISHA: Woo!

MATT: Nice! (Liam imitates arrows firing)

MATT: So, as your arrows sink into him, one blasts into him. Fire cascades up the side, you can see the middle of its plates beginning to burn and torch the cinderous glow. It reels back, gets its claws ready, now fixated on you 'cause you just announced your presence to it.

LAURA: I'm looking again, so.

MATT: All right. Anything you wanna do with...?

LAURA: Trinket?

MATT: Trinket.

LAURA: Oh, yeah. Can he run up and attack the other one? While keeping his eyes down?

MATT: He would have to use one of your attacks to do that.

LAURA: Oh okay, well then he's just hanging out.

MATT: Trinket's just hanging out.

LAURA: He's protecting Scanlan. (Matt imitates bear growling) Yeah, big old bear protecting your gnome.

LAURA: Protect the gnome!

LIAM: Gnome coverage. [Marisha And Taliesin] Gnome coverage.

MATT: No healer this week. What could possibly go wrong?

MARISHA: Gnomewatch 2015.

MATT: Scanlan, you're up.

SAM: Scanlan.

LIAM: Ride the bear, Scanlan.

SAM: Ride the bear.

TRAVIS: Oh my God.

SAM: I will just step forward a little, and I will cast polymorph on our big friend that we're surrounding. And I'll turn him into a snail.

MARISHA: A snail? Aww!

MATT: All right.

TRAVIS: Can you do that?!

SAM: Yes.

MATT: What's the DC, the difficulty class on your spells?

SAM: Through the horn of clarity or whatever. So it's 17.

MATT: 17, alright.

SAM: Or no, 19, sorry, 19.

MATT: 19.

SAM: It's plus two.

MATT: So, as the two umber hulks are there, the one that's in the center of the group, (snarls).

LAURA: Oh, Tiberius.

LAURA: Rears back, beginning to unleash its series of attacks, and then (sharp hiss), into this tiny--

TRAVIS: What?!

MATT: --snail form on the ground.

LAURA: Awesome!

LIAM: Don't touch the snail until the--

LAURA: Why?

LIAM: 'Cause he'll poof out into the fucking big guy again.

SAM: Don't hurt the snail.

LIAM: Leave it, leave it.

SAM: Don't pick up the snail. Just be nice to the snail.

LIAM: Leave it alone. Hit the other one.

ORION: Don't do anything. I'll take care of the snail. (talking over each other)

MATT: There's a tiny, tiny little snail on the ground now that looks very confused.

LAURA: That's confusing.

MATT: Very confused, which is ironic for an umber hulk, to feel confused.

SAM: As a bonus action, I give dice to-- who's coming up next? Who's coming up soon?

MATT: Next'll be Percy.

SAM: Percy, you get dice.

TALIESIN: What dice do I get?

MATT: d8.

SAM: A d8 for inspiration.

TALIESIN: A d8? All right. Excellent.

MATT: Percy, you're up. (Sam imitates flutes) Gotta do my app.

MATT: Do your app, fuck it up.

ORION: Do the app.

SAM: No, it's not ready.

(group laughs)

TALIESIN: I'm gonna take one of my two actions to clear my gun.

TRAVIS: Yeah, the jam.

TALIESIN: Clear the jam. And then set up for a fire shot. And I'm gonna take a fire shot. Am I at a disadvantage? (tinny electronic music)

MATT: You're inspired.

SAM: It's so weak, it's so weak.

TRAVIS: You've gotta get it better.

MATT: So, who are you shooting?

TALIESIN: I'm shooting our friend over there. I've just sort of turned, and I'm firing.

TALIESIN: So am I at a disadvantage?

MATT: Averting your gaze?

TALIESIN: I'm averting my gaze, but I know where it is.

MATT: Right. So go ahead and fire at disadvantage.

SAM: You got the dice, you got the dice.

TALIESIN: Okay. 14 with the disadvantage.

MATT: 14 with the disadvantage will miss, unfortunately. (imitates gun firing) The fire shot arcs off into the distance--

TALIESIN: Oh oh, actually--

MARISHA: Oh yeah, inspiration.

MATT: Add the inspiration dice.

TALIESIN: 17.

MATT: 17 will just barely hit.

(group cheers)

TALIESIN: Well done, well done, ha ha!

ORION: Good shot!

LIAM: Good stunt work, Tiberius.

TALIESIN: So, that's gonna do-- ba-bumpa-bum.

ORION: I have to wait to figure out when to open which one.

TALIESIN: That's 17 fire damage, 17 fire damage.

MATT: 17 fire damage, nice. Okay, you hear the shot hit, and you hear a cracking sound as one of its plates actually freezes and shatters off of its body, exposing kind of a fleshy undercarriage.

MARISHA: Nice. [Orion And Marisha] Undercarriage.

MATT: This umber hulk is starting to look a little rough. That brings us to the top of-- Do you want to move or stay where you are?

TALIESIN: I'm going to step back to-- bring me back two to three steps, just like, back away.

MATT: Back here.

TALIESIN: Yeah. Just like, here.

LAURA: Avoid the snail.

SAM: Yeah, don't step on the snail.

TALIESIN: I'm not stepping on the snail.

TALIESIN: Yeah, that's good.

MATT: There? Okay, good. All right, that brings us to--

LAURA: I'm using it!

MATT: Laser pointers, we have use. Keyleth, you're up. KEYLETH Okay, after seeing Grog get confused, I turn, and I go straight for his throat. And I'm trying to drag him into the creek. TRAVIS and

LAURA: Ooh.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: I wanna take the umber hulk into the creek right behind me.

MATT: Okay, so go ahead and roll for a grapple.

MARISHA: All right.

TRAVIS: Come on, cave bear.

MARISHA: How do I grapple as a bear?

LIAM: Bear hug, man, bear hug.

LAURA: Yeah, just take him.

TALIESIN: How does one grapple as a bear? It is a strength check, I guess.

MATT: Does anyone else-- Can I have the book real fast? Just to be sure we know how we're doing this.

TALIESIN: Have you noticed there's a rhinoceros in here?

MARISHA: I can be a rhinoceros.

MATT: It's a contest, yes.

TRAVIS: Why have you not been a rhinoceros yet?

MARISHA: It just hasn't been useful yet.

SAM: She usually picks a bird of some sort.

MARISHA: I'm waiting for the right time.

LIAM: She can only turn into things she's seen.

SAM: I'm a squirrel and a bird! You should be a rhinoceros.

TALIESIN: We're just waiting for you to scream, "It's morphin time!" It's morphing time! Bear!

MARISHA: Oh my god, can you make me smoke bombs that smoke, and I say, "It's morphin time"?

MATT: So you can make a grapple attempt in place of one of your attacks.

MARISHA: Okay. That's what I want to do.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: So I just strength check then?

MATT: So it is an athletics check.

MARISHA: Oh. I don't have stats, I'm a bear.

MATT: No, you use the bear's stats.

MARISHA: But all I have are the basic six.

MATT: Right, what's the strength?

MARISHA: Five.

MATT: Yeah.

MARISHA: So that's what I do.

MATT: Yeah, roll the dice, add plus five.

(group cheers)

ORION: It's 20!

MATT: Natural 20. (clapping) You reach forward and latch onto it with your claws and your teeth, onto the umber hulk.

MARISHA: Going for the throat.

MATT: Alright. So that's your first attack. You can go ahead while it's grappled and attack with the other strikes.

MARISHA: I'm taking him underwater.

MATT: Okay. You pull.

LAURA: Oh god, you're doing it, Keyleth.

MARISHA: Pulling him underwater.

LIAM: It's a waterfall, oh.

MATT: (imitates thudding) You both plunge underneath the water's surface. Take a big old breath right beforehand, and I'm going underwater.

ORION: Wait, can you let him go and let him drown?

LAURA: Yeah, let him go, 'cause it's a waterfall.

MARISHA: No, I'm holding on to him.

LAURA: But Keyleth, there's a waterfall. It's fine.

MATT: It's now its turn. It's going to try and break your grapple.

MATT: Make an athletics check.

MARISHA: Against his strength, I guess. Ah, 20.

MATT: 20, okay. You maintain your grip on the umber hulk. It's thrashing in the water trying to get its way to the surface. (snarls) Still slashing about. So it's gonna make its attacks against you.

MATT: That is a 14.

MARISHA: Hits.

MATT: 14 hits you?

MARISHA: I'm a bear, my armor class is 12 right now.

MATT: Well no, you keep your armor class.

MARISHA: I keep my armor class?

MATT: I'm pretty sure.

LIAM: Yes, the answer to that is yes.

TRAVIS: Yeah, you do.

LIAM: Definitely yes.

MATT: Nah, let's see real fast actually on this one.

SAM: Keep subscribing to Geek & Sundry everybody.

MATT: Exactly.

SAM: We're going for 1,200 subscribers tonight, and if we reach that number... good for you.

(group laughs)

MATT: Here we go.

LIAM: Sam will write a ballad.

SAM: I will.

MATT: You gain the scores--

SAM: By the way, this music is just great.

MATT: It's 12 plus-- it's whatever the 12 is, plus your proficiency modifier, I think is what it is. For now, we'll say it hits. 'Cause I don't wanna hold this up.

TALIESIN: There once was a player--

SAM: In Nantucket?

LAURA: Don't.

MATT: No, you gain its armor class.

MARISHA: I do gain its armor class.

MATT: Yeah, you do.

MARISHA: So it hits.

MATT: Yeah, it hits you. All right. Second strike. That's also gonna hit you. All three hit you. You take six points of slashing damage. 11 points of slashing damage. And six, 11, 17--

MARISHA: It's okay guys.

MATT: Total of 26 points of slashing damage.

MARISHA: I am no longer a bear.

MATT: So you lose your grip as your form reverts. You are now back to Keyleth's form in the water.

SAM: And you're in the water!

MARISHA: Can I cast a concentration spell on myself?

MATT: No, because you used your actions to grapple it.

MARISHA: And that's it.

MATT: So you're now just back in the Keyleth form, underwater. You catch your breath and realize you're now underwater in near darkness with an umber hulk right on you.

MARISHA: Hey brah. Sup? Fancy meeting you here.

MATT: Vax, you're up.

LIAM: Okay, so first thing I do is lean down and pick up the snail off the ground and say, "Hey, um, go fuck yourself." And then I throw him into the waterfall.

SAM: Oh Jesus!

MATT: Over here?

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: All right. Go ahead and roll a ranged attack. So just roll, add dexterity.

LIAM: Okay.

LAURA: Oh gosh, okay okay.

LIAM: Great great great. Dexterity you say? 18.

MATT: 18?

LAURA: No, it's higher than that, yo!

ORION: No, it's fine if he drowns and dies.

LIAM: Oh sorry, yeah, that's 21. 22, 22.

MATT: You throw, it arcs over. Lands in the water. (imitates water sucking) Goes under into the waterfall.

LIAM: Toodle-oo shitface.

SAM: Hey wait, he (stutters) he swam away?

MATT: No, he threw the snail over the waterfall.

SAM: Hey! Bye-bye!

LIAM: Now, that seems like a bonus action to me, right?

(group laughs)

MATT: That's an attack.

LIAM: So then that's an attack, okay.

MARISHA: (laughs) That's an attack.

MATT: It's the world's easiest grapple throw.

TRAVIS: You threw him forever.

LIAM: Then I'm good.

LAURA: That's it?

LIAM: Well, that's my action, right?

MATT: Correct.

LIAM: And I only have one.

SAM: You can move, you can move.

LIAM: All right, so then, I'll hop through, through Percy and my sister. And run up behind the shithead who's fucking with Keyleth.

MATT: Make an acrobatics check, try to tumble through them.

LIAM: Yeah, that's easy.

ORION: He's in the water, though.

LIAM: 16 (mumbles) 29.

MATT: Yeah, you're fine, and where do you wanna go?

LIAM: Right up behind shitface there. And do I have anything left? Or do I just get there and stop.

MATT: Well, it was the attack to throw it. You would have your second off-hand.

LIAM: Second attack. Well let's stab him in the ass then, right.

MATT: Well, you have disadvantage 'cause it's currently in the water thrashing about, and it's hard to see. Well, that's not very good. 15.

MATT: 15 misses unfortunately. So as you slash down with your dagger into the water, it's just too hard to really make out what that form moving is.

LIAM: I still feel pretty good about that round.

TRAVIS: Yeah, it was pretty good.

MATT: Grog, you're up.

TRAVIS: Am I? (grunts) With my frenzied rage renewed, I run towards the water, haunted by nightmares of Sebastian in the Little Mermaid, and I leap into the water and start slashing and slashing.

MATT: Go ahead and make your three attacks, Grog. (Liam sings opening notes to "Under the Sea")

TRAVIS: ♫ Le poisson, le poisson, hee hee hee, fuck you bitch ♫ (Matt laughs)

TRAVIS: 18 plus... that's 26.

MATT: 26 hits.

TRAVIS: Okay, good. Second attack. 26.

MATT: Hits.

TRAVIS: Okay. 25.

MATT: Hits.

TRAVIS: Good.

MATT: Go ahead and roll damage, Grog. As you come charging forward, just (grunts), leaving bits of foam cascading off the side of your mouth. Your eyes just glazed over with white. You bring the axe down into the water, form towards where the splashing is. Keeping mindful that Keyleth might be in there somewhere. But you're very much see the larger form in the field, so.

TRAVIS: It's all about sushi right?

MARISHA: Oh, I'm fine.

MATT: Yeah, so damage on the first strike?

TRAVIS: Eight, second one is 16.

MATT: Eight, 16, that's 24.

TRAVIS: And 17, thirty. What's 24 plus 10? LAURA AND

MATT: 34.

MATT: Grog. 34 points of damage. As your axe comes down, slam once into the water. You see one of the claws start pulling itself up out of the surface. It's head's still under the water. You slam the axe down. You see the arm actually snaps and begins to drift down the river. As it looks up at you, its eyes open. Before the gaze can meet yours, the axe comes down and plunges itself directly into the forehead of the umber hulk with a shunk sound. As it does, its body goes limp and begins to float down the water.

(group cheers and claps)

LAURA: Well, that was easy.

SAM: Was it?

LAURA: I walk up and try to help Keyleth out of the water.

MATT: Okay. You help Keyleth out of the water. At this point, the snail form, which doesn't have a whole lot of hit points, has taken enough damage to alleviate itself from the polymorph. As the spell fades, as the snail form is destroyed, the other umber hulk begins clawing its way up the side of the mountain, burrows through the actual stonework--

LAURA: Ah, balls.

MATT: --(imitates explosion) and bursts out of the ground right behind you, Vax. (imitates explosion) LIAM: Oh, fuck a duck.

TRAVIS: Come on, drop this thing.

LAURA: This is why you shouldn't have thrown the snail.

MATT: But that's its turn.

LIAM: I thought it would get washed all the way out. Down the toilet, all the way out.

MATT: All right, that brings us to the top of the round. Tiberius.

MARISHA: It was at least badass.

LIAM: Elegant.

MARISHA: It was very elegant.

TALIESIN: I'm sure it was a wonderful thought.

ORION: Firebolt.

MATT: Okay, roll for it. Roll for the attacks.

LIAM: Just past it, please.

MATT: Yep, any directed spell like that you have to roll and add your spell range modifier.

ORION: Sweet, that does not hit.

MATT: What'd you roll?

ORION: Uh, 11.

MATT: Disadvantage, so. You rolled an 11 total?

ORION: 10.

MATT: Yeah, you miss. So, as you aim your firebolt (imitated fire shooting) You're just averting your gaze, and it jumps over and arcs through the rest of the carvern, lighting it as it goes like a flare.

ORION: Good cavern.

MATT: That leads to Scanlan.

SAM: Scanlan?

MATT: Actually no, Vex is up and then Scanlan, sorry.

LAURA: Me?

MATT: You, you.

LIAM: Kill it before it kills me. Okay.

LAURA: I am gonna keep my gaze averted, but I just heard it, and I'm gonna--

ORION: That rhymed.

LAURA: I'm gonna attack it. WIth some arrows.

MATT: Go for it. So two arrows, notched. (imitates arrows firing) Disadvantage on each attack.

LAURA: Oh, okay.

LIAM: Don't let it eat my head, please.

LAURA: Yeah, it's the same. 18. No, lying. 20.

MATT: 20 hits. Go ahead and roll for the second attack.

LAURA: 19.

MATT: Both hit.

LAURA: Okay, good.

MATT: Go ahead and roll damage on each.

LAURA: Is this the one that I Hunter's Marked? No, the other one Hunter's Marked.

MATT: The other one was, yeah.

LAURA: Okay, that's fine. 10 plus 13 is 23.

MATT: But you could switch over your hunter's mark.

LAURA: And I switched over my Hunter's Mark as my bonus action.

MATT: With your bonus action.

LAURA: So I add the-- oh, one.

MATT: So a total of?

LAURA: 24.

MATT: 24 points of damage. All right, got you. (imitates arrows flying) The arrows end up piercing part of the armor. Each sink in a good, solid six, seven inches or so. It angrily (wet snarling) at the impact, but it wasn't enough force to send it back at all. But it knows exactly where you are. That brings us to Scanlan.

SAM: Scanlan's gonna move right in front of where-- I believe that's Percy?

LIAM: Save the day, Scanny.

LAURA: Oh yeah, I should've ran Trinket up there.

LIAM: Repeat, just like last week.

SAM: Toss another dice to Percy, he seems to need them.

TALIESIN: Thank you.

SAM: And I'm gonna cast lightning bolt at the thing. Who's wet from being in the water, yes? So electricity is gonna be pretty bad on him.

MATT: All right. So, because you're kind of averting your gaze to look away--

SAM: Disadvantage.

MATT: No, because you don't roll to attack. But it gets advantage on its saving throw because of that aspect.

MATT: So, it rolled natural 20 for its saving, so it takes half damage. But go ahead and roll your 8d6, it's the lighting bolt.

SAM: 8d6.

MATT: Arcs out from your fingers. (imitates lightning)

SAM: 8d6, 8d6. 8d6?!

TALIESIN: Yeah.

SAM: Eight?!

TRAVIS: Yeah.

LIAM: Yes.

SAM: Shit!

(group laughs) Uh, six, seven, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12.

(group laughs) 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 (mutters softly) 28!

MATT: 28, okay. 14 points of damage to the umber hulk as the bolt of lightning cascades through its body. It lights up for a second as you see the crawling fingers of electricity kind of shoot through its plates.

SAM: I like crawling fingers.

MATT: Indeed.

ORION: That was the name of the one girl, wasn't it?

SAM: Yes.

MARISHA: Oh, I loved Crawline, she was so nice.

MATT: As the bolt grounds itself, the rest of the water on its form evaporates from the sheer force of the electricity. You see the umber hulk still standing. Angry, in pain, and standing, although it's still looking a little worse for wear. You don't wanna do that to an umber hulk.

(group laughs)

SAM: You're right.

MATT: Percy, you're up.

TALIESIN: Taking my shot, I'm averting my eyes, so.

SAM: Use those dice, use those dice.

MARISHA: Whoo!

TALIESIN: 24 to hit.

MATT: That was the disadvantage?

TALIESIN: At the disadvantage.

MATT: Awesome, that hits.

TALIESIN: That's 1d8 plus five. That's, ugh, that's terrible. That's six points of damage. I'm taking my second shot.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: Shoot it in the mouth. (clapping)

MARISHA: Oh wait, but it's disadvantage.

TALIESIN: I rolled twice. So I rolled a 19 and a 20, which means--

MARISHA: Which are both your critical, right? Which are both my criticals. So a critical at a disadvantage.

TRAVIS: Sick, nasty.

TALIESIN: Just point, nyah, nyah!

LIAM: Yes Percy. Critical on a disadvantage!

MATT: Well done.

TALIESIN: So I'm also gonna spend my die.

LIAM: Whatever your last name is again.

SAM: The die is for the attack.

MATT: It's for attacks, skills, and saving throws, not for damage.

TALIESIN: That's, uh... five, six, seven, eight, that's 11 points of damage.

TRAVIS: Finish him.

MATT: 11 points of damage from the first one.

TALIESIN: 11 points of damage from the second one.

MARISHA: But that one's critical. So it doubles, right?

TALIESIN: It's just 1d8 becomes 2d8, right?

MATT: Correct, yeah.

TALIESIN: Yeah that's-- yeah.

MATT: Okay, it's 11 points damage. Gotcha. So, as you rear back your shot (imitates gun firing) it resounds. It hits the plate, shatters it on the other side of its chest. You can now see this weird purplish goo beginning to spill from its wounds. You see it's holding itself up, and it's having a hard time keeping physical form there. Keyleth, you're up.

MARISHA: Oh. Um, cool. (Liam laughs)

ORION: Word.

MARISHA: Word. I'm still a person. I'm gonna go ahead and also do a call lighting spell. Bam, call lightning right on its head. 'Cause he's wet.

MATT: Call lighting it is.

MATT: So, as you begin to complete your spell, you can see now the upper arch, the 100 foot archway, the ceiling of this area begins to fill with this strange cloudy, thunderous booms, as a raincloud is created and summoned across the rooftop. At which point, Keyleth frees her hand up and pulls down as a single bolt streaks through the air, slamming into the same lightning bolt wound that you left previously on it, where the edges of its armor are still glowing from the heat. Go ahead and roll damage.

MARISHA: Got him right in the ass. It just gets straight damage?

MATT: Yeah, it gets a bonus on its saving throw, though. Or advantage. Which it makes.

MARISHA: I get 3d10.

MATT: 3d10. All right, go for it.

MARISHA: Six, seven--

MATT: It is no longer outdoors-only.

MATT: It gets a bonus for being outdoors.

MARISHA: 11 damage.

MATT: 11 damage to the umber hulk. Which is halved. He made a saving throw, to a six.

MARISHA: Saving throw, mm.

MATT: Yeah.

TRAVIS: Finish him. Cause you're having to avert your gaze. You're trying to work out this whole thing where you're all basically at a severe disadvantage fighting this thing, unless you want to be completely fucked over. All right.

SAM: Should have created sunglasses for him or something.

TRAVIS: We have two of its eyes.

MATT: It's now its turn.

LAURA: Ugh, it's still alive.

MATT: It turns and runs past, to the one who shot it with the angry lightning bolt. (Travis laughs)

MATT: The tiny gnome that now is a delicious morsel in the mandibles of an umber hulk. It comes running forward like a giant armored gorilla. (grunts)

LAURA: Oh, no.

MATT: Reaching back with both of its claws, swiping at you Scanlan, that is a 23 to hit.

SAM: Oh, yeah.

MATT: 25 to hit.

MATT: Its mandibles are 24 to hit.

SAM: That hits three times.

MATT: Yep. You take 13--

LAURA: Oh, no!

LIAM: But you're so little.

MATT: 24.

SAM: Ooh!

MATT: 38 points of slashing damage. This is the sound I make. (high-pitched wail)

(group laughs)

MATT: As it just strikes you, all of its form now, you're almost pinned to the ground, blood oozing from your face as gashes, slash wounds are across your entire body. It's looming over you, ready to try and finish you off next round.

LAURA: Ugh!

MATT: That brings us to Vax.

LIAM: Okay. So, he's now got his back turned to me. I'm just gonna stick both knives into his guts and say, "No one touches the gnome!"

LIAM: Right in his guts, that's shit. So, fuck that. And this one is way better. So that's 27.

MATT: 27 hits definitely.

LIAM: Okay, this is the flametongue.

MATT: It is considered flanking, because Scanlan is there. Oh yes.

LIAM: Four plus two is six. (Sam sings along with dramatic music)

LIAM: Two, three, fuck, four, fuck, seven, nine, 18, 24 damage. With the second knife, sneak attack into his ball sack.

MATT: How do you want to do this?

(group yells triumphantly)

LIAM: I stick it in the back of his spider nads. And rip it out his bum and out the back of him.

LAURA: Gross!

LIAM: And just spill it all out the bottom. (all talking at once)

SAM: I'm right next to him, it might spill on me.

LIAM: That's all right, that's all right.

MATT: As it's looming over Scanlan who's on his back, it's tearing into him and starting to gut him best it can. He's screaming from beneath. You rush underneath, tumble, bringing your dagger up and slam it right under the bottom of its abdomen.

LAURA: Balls.

MATT: As you do it, (snarls), looks down towards you and right before its gaze can meet yours, you yank back with all your might, basically scissoring and jagged drawing the blade up the back of its body. As you do it, (imitates vomiting) leaps forward. It's now-soft torso and belly left open from the armor plates being shot off, spills a number of its warm innards right onto Scanlan's body and form.

SAM: Ugh, no! It went in my mouth! (Travis laughs)

MATT: And then it collapses on top of him..

SAM: Ah!

(group laughs)

MATT: You take six points of crushing damage as the umber hulk collapses on top of you.

TRAVIS: I run over and shove the umber hulk off of Scanlan.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: Ugh! Ah!

LAURA: Oh my gosh.

SAM: What just happened?

MARISHA: I go over to Scanlan, and I just, I just lay my hands on him, and I cast Cure Wounds in a level two spot.

LIAM: Nobody touches my man-wife.

(group laughs)

SAM: What's that spell do?

MARISHA: You do-- it's 2d8 plus 10 healing.

SAM: You roll, right?

TALIESIN: Yep.

MARISHA: Do I roll or does he?

MATT: For which spell is this?

MARISHA: I'm doing Cure Wounds on him. At level two.

MATT: Cure Wounds, level two? 2d8 plus five.

MARISHA: Do I roll?

MATT: You roll.

MARISHA: So you heal, 16, 20 points.

SAM: Thank you.

MATT: So, as you heal him, touch him with the spell, you wipe the umber hulk ichor off of your hand.

ORION: I cast prestidigitation and clean everybody up.

LAURA: Maybe you should jump in that water, Scanlan.

TRAVIS: You should get in the water and clean yourself off.

TALIESIN: We have running water. Use running water.

SAM: I think I wanna keep it on.

(group laughs)

ORION: He's clean already.

TRAVIS: As a badge of honor?

SAM: It's a badge of honor.

LIAM: Like the walking dead, you're gonna sneak by the rest of 'em?

SAM: I think I'm gonna keep the blood on me, if you don't mind.

LAURA: Alright.

MATT: That's, uh... okay.

TRAVIS: Gross.

SAM: Warning to others.

MARISHA: Yeah.

MATT: So, you still hear the rushing of the water down below. You now stand at this portion of the cavern, the dull glow in the distance of some sort of light source in that direction. The rest of the caverns opens up this way.

LAURA: Ugh.

TRAVIS: Let's go towards the light.

SAM: Can we take a short rest and heal up?

TRAVIS: No, I run.

LAURA: Short rest, short rest.

TRAVIS: No, running.

LIAM: Running?! (Sam laughs)

SAM: Why don't you let some people heal?

MATT: Grog goes running. Grog, who's interested.

TRAVIS: I'm frenzy raging.

SAM: Oh God, Grog! Grog, no!

TRAVIS: It's a bright, shiny thing. I'm going there!

LAURA: He is frenzying.

LIAM: I'm unscathed, so I run after Grog, just to give him backup if he needs.

MARISHA: I'll follow after Vax.

MATT: All right, you guys head out. Eventually, you come around the corner to see what looks like a campfire.

ORION: I follow as well.

TRAVIS: Aww.

MATT: It looks like a setup with a small bundle of, what looks like bedding. There's a campfire set up. It's mostly out at this point. Like there's still a little bit of a flame flicker to it, but it's just embers for the most part. Does not appear--

TRAVIS: I start hacking away at the bedding. Just chopping the shit out of it.

SAM: Jesus!

(group laughs)

MATT: Grog starts hacking away at the bedding. (Travis grunts)

LIAM: I'm just watching and shrugging.

LAURA: No, look and search around and see what's in the bedding.

LIAM: I try to keep like six or seven foot difference--

MATT: (arrows whooshing)

SAM: Oh, no!

LIAM: Fuck!

MATT: Three crossbow bolts come flying out of nowhere--

LIAM: You dick!

MATT: --two hitting Grog.

LIAM: You dick! (Marisha laughs)

LAURA: Why weren't you stealthing?

LIAM: I am now.

TRAVIS: Somebody likes their bedding apparently.

LIAM: I rolled a 29 of stealth as soon as the first arrow flew.

MARISHA: That was a Coleman, alright?

(group laughs) That was a very expensive sleeping bag.

TALIESIN: Never attack the bedding before you know the thread count.

TRAVIS: It was 3,000 count Egyptian.

TALIESIN: God.

MATT: Grog, you take seven points of piercing damage, which is halved to four because you're raging.

TRAVIS: Right. (grunts)

MATT: As you can see what looks like three small--

LIAM: Duergar.

LAURA: No, they're dwarves.

LIAM: Yeah, that's duergar. That's dark dwarves.

LAURA: Oh!

LIAM: I consider myself a nerd.

MATT: And some strange beast you've not seen before seems to be accompanying one of them.

LAURA: Is that a brain?

MATT: It looks like an oversized, swollen brain with a set of claws.

LIAM: It's hanging brain.

SAM: Krang?

MARISHA: Brain?

MATT: It's just like a large brain with a set of arms and legs like a panther.

LAURA: What?

TRAVIS: It's the brain bug from Starship Troopers.

MARISHA: That can't be good.

ORION: Take that out first.

MATT: Going off the same intiative order. They've gone.

LIAM: I rolled a 29 stealth.

MATT: Yes, I know. So you haven't been seen, and you have the first action.

TRAVIS: Are they on the same level as us?

MATT: They are, yes.

LIAM: So I can dash and still attack?

MATT: If you'd like to.

LIAM: I would love to. I would love to, uh-- where's this thing?

LAURA: Go for the brain.

LIAM: Yeah, of course go for the brain. I'm gonna hang brain. I'm gonna run over--

MATT: Well if you dash as your action--

LIAM: Oh, I can't stealth? So to stay stealth, I need to go normal speed?

MATT: Well you can dash as your action, but dash is your, basically a double move. So you move and use your action to move as well.

LIAM: And that's it.

MATT: That's all you'll be able to do.

LIAM: Um, I'm gonna-- no. I'll you what I'm gonna do. I'm gonna go-- hey, god. I'm gonna move over here, stealthily. And go for ready.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: That's what it's called, right? And wait?

MATT: Just wait.

LIAM: And the trigger is when this asshole duergar moves forward, I'm gonna stick him in the back of the neck.

MATT: Okay. All right.

MARISHA: Nice.

MATT: Tiberius. You hear Grog go, "Ugh!"

ORION: Oh, it seems like there's trouble over there.

(group laughs) What has Grog gotten himself into?

MARISHA: I don't know. (Travis moans and strangles)

ORION: I saunter--

TRAVIS: You saunter?

SAM: Saunter.

ORION: Yes.

MATT: You jump off your pillar.

ORION: Oh.

MATT: Saunter over here?

ORION: Yeah, I would go around there to-- That's good, I suppose. What's in between the-- between him and that. Is that a boulder?

MATT: It's a giant raised stalagmite.

ORION: I see, how tall is that?

MATT: It's about 25 feet tall.

ORION: Oh crap, okay.

MATT: All you see is Grog standing with three bolts sticking out of his chest now.

LAURA: Oh no! (Travis imitates wood breaking)

ORION: I can't do anything too much.

LIAM: Grog, I've got the hiccups.

MATT: Anything else, Tiberius? Gotta keep this moving.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

LIAM: The bolts.

TRAVIS: Right.

ORION: I'll just cast stoneskin on myself. Okay, Stoneskin cast on you. That brings us to Vex.

LAURA: All right, I can hear them screaming so I'm gonna run over. Call Trinket as I'm doing it.

TRAVIS: Who's screaming?

LAURA: You, you screamed.

TRAVIS: No, I'm not screaming.

MATT: Do you want to use your full round to move? Cause that's as far as you can move currently. Actually you can move two more.

LAURA: Can I see anything from that point?

MATT: All you see is Grog over there.

LIAM: They're covered and he's around the bend, so I'd run in further.

LAURA: All right, I'll run in further. Can I run in and stealth or is that it?

MATT: Uh, you can attempt to.

LAURA: I'm gonna try to stealth as I'm going in.

MATT: You're at disadvantage on the stealth roll, but go for it.

LAURA: Oh, a 20. Aw! 17, okay. Plus my stealth, which is five.

MATT: All right, so we'll say you're pulled off to the side there. The stealth twins over there being all stealthy-like. No one can see what's going on with them. It's like they're related.

TRAVIS: What's all this stealthing? Where's all the killing?

MATT: That's your turn.

LAURA: I can't attack anything.

MATT: Scanlan.

SAM: Okay, I'm gonna move right there into the room as far as I can.

MATT: You can go that far.

SAM: Okay. And cast Stinking Cloud right there. (Travis laughs) It's gonna smell like just ass over there.

(group laughs)

MATT: Okay. Best you can see, and you haven't really seen where they are, so you're kind of like, oh, you have the idea that perhaps they're over in that vicinity on the bolts around there. So you can cast over in this area, which is the only thing you have view of.

SAM: Oh, oh, because that's a big rock in my view there.

MATT: This is a big rock right there, yeah.

SAM: Okay, so yeah. I'll put it right where you're saying, right there, yeah.

MATT: Okay, that's about where you can go. All right, so (hisses), a giant--

TRAVIS: Ass cloud.

MATT: --green, ass cloud--

ORION: Scanlan, are you doing an ass cloud again?

MATT: --begins to fill this space here. As it does, they all begin to hack and cough. You can hear this now between the rest of you, echoing throughout.

TRAVIS: I'm slightly aroused.

(group laughs)

ORION: I was just going to say.

TRAVIS: I'm drawn to the smell.

SAM: (imitates flute) --stinks.

MATT: ♫ Constitution saving throws. Everything in the cloud. ♫

SAM: (imitates flute) --stink.

MATT: ♫ All them are failing. ♫

ORION: Doing stink magic.

MATT: All right. You hear a cacophonous amount of hacking, coughing, as all of them drop their attack stances and begin just retching, nearly vomiting, in the middle of this green cloud of gas.

TRAVIS: Outstanding.

SAM: I'll also take a great heal potion? Is that what they're called? Not moderate.

MATT: Yes, greater.

SAM: Great, greater, okay. I'll do that by myself. You keep going.

MATT: Okay, greater heal potion is 4d4 plus four.

SAM: Thank you.

MATT: All right, that brings us to Percy.

TALIESIN: I'm going to start crawling around the-- I have a little thingy. Someone took the thingy. Oh, laser pointer. Thank you.

LIAM: Hello, hey.

TRAVIS: It's a black light.

TALIESIN: I'm gonna start heading down this direction, and I'm going to actually spend a movement, spend my action and move a little further down, about, yeah, about there, so I can start getting a good look of what's up.

MATT: Okay, good. All right. That brings us to Keyleth.

MARISHA: Okay, so I am going to take this and move up to about here, I guess.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: Is where I can see. And then I'm gonna take this little block of stone right here, this stalagtite or mite or whatever it is--

MATT: Correct.

MARISHA: --and I'm gonna use Wall of Stone. And instead of creating a wall, I'm just gonna take that one and I'm gonna push it (imitates thudding) against that wall and try and crush those guys.

TRAVIS: Whoa!

MATT: Wait, you're gonna use Wall of Stone to try and push that back?

MARISHA: I'm gonna take this wall, and I'm gonna go crunch.

MATT: All right.

SAM: Oh my God.

TRAVIS: Can you do that?

TALIESIN: That's kinda harsh.

MARISHA: I don't know. We'll find out.

LAURA: I like that that's the most common quip. "Can, can you do that?"

SAM: You can actually do that?

ORION: It's like earthbending.

MARISHA: I'm trying to earthbend this wall.

SAM: Hey Grog. Did you ever write down our underwater spell, potion thingies, whatever those were called?

TRAVIS: We got two of 'em.

SAM: Yeah, did you right it down, though? 'Cause I didn't.

TRAVIS: What they were?

TALIESIN: She's got waterbreathing, so.

MATT: So how it works is, Wall of Stone, you can create a wall of stone, but it cannot occupy the space of a creature. So you will not be able to push them back, unfortunately. But you could lock them into an area, if that's what you wanted to do.

SAM: The man telling us what we can and can't do.

(group laughs)

MATT: It's the nature of the spell, guys.

MARISHA: Yeah, that's a waste of time. Instead, I will-- I still got a Call Lightning going. Fuck it. I'm just gonna lightning bolt some bitches.

MATT: All right. You don't have view of any of them right now, unfortunately.

MARISHA: Well, then I move to where I can.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: Yeah good. Cop attitude with the DM.

TRAVIS: Yeah, yeah.

SAM: The man in charge of our fates.

TALIESIN: That always goes really well.

MATT: That'll be your turn.

SAM: Because of the attitude.

MATT: You moved twice. You had to get a long distance.

MARISHA: Did I?

MATT: Yeah, because you were back here.

LAURA: Yeah, dude. It was really far away, yo. I've got a decent speed, okay, fine. That's my turn then.

MATT: Sorry.

LIAM: Fuck those Wizards of the Coast, man! I do what I wanna do.

MARISHA: Fucking Seattle assholes.

MATT: All right, so.

ORION: I love Seattle.

LIAM: So do I.

MATT: And what's the DC again of your spell?

SAM: Ah, oh.

SAM: Spell save DC, is that right? 19.

MATT: 19. All right. All three of the-- and you can now get a view of them. They are dwarven, but their skin is ashy and grey. Their eyes are white and pupil-less. And they are all on the verge of vomiting right now. They're both just keeling over. One of them tries to bring a crossbow up, and (imitates vomiting) has to put it back down again. They are unable to act this turn. The weird brain creature, however--

MARISHA: That's awesome.

TRAVIS: What, has no nostrils?

TALIESIN: There's nowhere for him to retch from.

MATT: It moves out of the cloud, looks over at you Grog.

SAM: Oh, no.

MATT: And just bears down for a second. And you feel this... intrusion in your mind.

TRAVIS: On my professor-torial mind.

MATT: Go ahead and make an intelligence saving throw.

SAM: Oh, those aren't good for you.

MARISHA: Oh, no. (Travis laughs)

TALIESIN: Well this, this ends poorly.

TRAVIS: Oh good, my modifier's negative two, so yippee-kye-ay-eh. Six.

MATT: Alright.

ORION: Good roll.

TALIESIN: Good roll.

MARISHA: That's a good number.

MATT: You suffer nine points of psychic damage as there's a sudden blast of excruciating pain in the center of your brain. It actually shakes you a moment from your rage, which then fills your mind once again.

TRAVIS: Like Kenny G music coming through my brain.

TALIESIN: Someone needs a Juggernaut helmet.

MATT: Also, you suffer--

MARISHA: He needs a Magneto helmet.

TALIESIN: Yeah, he needs the full Magneto.

MATT: --eight points of intelligence damage technically. You immediately fall unconscious. (Laura gasps)

MARISHA: What?!

MATT: Your intelligence is brought to zero.

TRAVIS: Ah! But I was at six!

LIAM: You gotta kill that thing.

LAURA: Oh no!

TRAVIS: I turn into a turnip?

MATT: That brings us to-- (Matt laughs) Tiberius.

ORION: Tiberius, I mean--

MATT: Yes, you're Tiberius.

ORION: I say--

MATT: You just watched Grog just go (groans) and fall to the ground. Almost into the campfire.

LAURA: Oh, no.

TRAVIS: It's like when I tried to read 50 Shades of Grey. (groans)

ORION: Okay, I'm gonna--

TALIESIN: Around the bear.

ORION: Okay, I'm gonna go right up to where Grog is.

MATT: All right.

ORION: Right there, right in front of him. Now can I see the brain fucker?

MATT: Yes, you can from there.

MARISHA: The brain fucker.

MATT: The brain fucker's official name.

TALIESIN: Brain lover, brain lover.

ORION: Ooh, you're a nasty one.

MARISHA: He's a lover, not a fighter.

ORION: I'm gonna fire a glacial blast at this dude.

MATT: Okay. Single targeted beam.

TALIESIN: Lobey.

MARISHA: Lobey.

TALIESIN: We're gonna name him Lobey.

MARISHA: Let's call him Lobey. (Laura laughs)

MATT: Makes its saving throw.

TALIESIN: "Lobey, no!"

MATT: What's your DC?

ORION: My DC is 17.

MATT: It just rolled a 17, yeah. It makes the saving throw. So half damage.

TALIESIN: Take him everywhere.

ORION: Four, six, and 8d6.

TALIESIN: Our little Lobey.

MARISHA: Can we call him Jeff, Jeff Lobey?

SAM: Is that campfire still firing?

TALIESIN: Jeff Lobey.

MATT: It's embers, yeah. 21, 22, 23. 24, 26, 27, 22. 29 damage.

MATT: 29 damage? (Taliesin laughing)

MATT: As you put your arms out, you focus this blast of just freezing cold arcane energy that slams into the side of this brain creature.

TALIESIN: Jeff Lobey, thank you.

MATT: As it does, you see it begins to freeze its entire body. As it reaches up and tries to climb up it solidifies and then shatters into a hundred million pieces.

(group cheers)

SAM: Oh, the brain's dead.

TALIESIN: You killed Jeff Lobey!

MARISHA: You killed Jeff Lobey.

SAM: Lisa Loeb?

MARISHA: Lisa Lobey!

(group laughs) They just keep going!

MATT: Lisa Loeb and then the nine intelligence damage. All right. So the brain just (imitates shattering) cascades across the ground.

LIAM: Lisa Lobey.

MATT: And thank God. Vex, you're now seeing three dwarves retching and coughing over, kind of looking about very nervously.

LAURA: Can I move to where I can get a line of site on that one?

MATT: On this one here?

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: Yeah, you can move to there and get a line of sight.

LAURA: Okay cool, then I'm gonna shoot him. Oh wait, no, I can't.

SAM: Why?

LAURA: Yeah yeah yeah, I'm gonna do that.

LIAM: You still have a little bit of cover.

LAURA: I'm gonna do-- it's fine, I got it. I'm really good.

LIAM: Just be a badass, okay? That's your job.

LAURA: Okay. 27.

MATT: That hits.

LIAM: Are you alright, big guy?

LIAM: "Muh!"

LAURA: Oh, I should've tried to-- it's okay.

LIAM: "Muh! Muh!"

SAM: It's weird, Grog weirdly seems smarter now than he was before.

LAURA: Hunter's Mark on that guy.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: Beep boop.

MATT: Good remembering.

MARISHA: Professor Grog's having a hard time.

LAURA: 11.

MATT: 11, all right.

LAURA: 11, and then I'm gonna hit him again. And that's a 23.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: And that is nine damage for that arrow. And then the six for a Hunter's Mark is five.

MATT: So a total of...?

LAURA: Oh jeez-louise, 30 plus five is... 35.

MATT: (imitates arrows flying) "Ugh!" The hacking, coughing duergar dwarf is like, (coughs) One in the shoulder, and the other shoulder. And it looks like that you, (inhales sharply) As it inhales a big old whiff of horrible stinking cloud gas, the arrow (imitates arrow flying) through its throat and out the back of its head. Falls flat on its back.

LAURA: Yeah.

(group cheers)

MATT: The other ones look nervously about.

MARISHA: Get him a pillow! What!

MATT: One of them's just coughing out, saying something in Undercommon. (speaks in angry gibberish)

MATT: Anyone here speak Undercommon?

LAURA: I do!

MATT: You do?

SAM: You speak Undercommon?

LAURA: I do.

TALIESIN: Oondercommon.

LAURA: I knew we were gonna be going down into some--

MATT: You hear him say, "Quick, there's our exit! "Back, back to the master."

LAURA: (whispering) Back to the master!

TRAVIS: Who's the master?

LAURA: You're unconscious.

MATT: All right. That brings us to Scanlan.

SAM: Ah, shit. I did not understand them, right? So I don't know that they're going to run.

MATT: No.

TRAVIS: Let 'em run back to the master and we'll track 'em.

SAM: I didn't learn that they're running, so. Can I call out that I heard them? Say, "Don't let them run!"

MATT: No, this happening just as you heard them.

SAM: Okay, well. I don't have a good line of sight on them, so I don't even know that they're there really, right? I just hear coughing in the distance.

MATT: Yep. Then I'll just move further into the cavern there. And I don't know that this works, but I'll try to cast Dispel Magic on Grog.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: I don't know if that, if it's magic. I have no idea.

MATT: So you go ahead and you focus, you cast Dispel Magic in Grog's vicinity.

SAM: ♫ Wake up, Grog ♫

MATT: You see the shift of arcane, waving energy.

TRAVIS: ♫ If I only had a brain ♫

MATT: It does not seem to have an effect.

SAM: It doesn't do it! Damn it! Then as my bonus action, can I still give him an inspiration dice to do on like saving...?

MATT: You think at this point, Grog isn't unconscious. Grog is catatonic. Grog has no intelligence. There is nothing home. You see him, on the ground, drooling, eyes glazed over. There is nothing there.

TALIESIN: You can't inspire a cantaloupe.

LAURA: What are we gonna do?

TALIESIN: The cantaloupe, it's not gonna feel better about itself.

SAM: Okay, then I give my dice to Vax.

TALIESIN: I've tried insulting a cantaloupe, you just don't get anywhere.

SAM: Vax, I've just inspired you. (imitates flute)

MATT: I think the chat room's catching on for those who know D&D well.

LIAM: Okay, I hear a little shithead grey-skinned dwarf--

SAM: Wait, it's not your turn. I just gave you dice. I thought you said Vax. Okay, sorry.

MATT: It's all right. So that ends Scanlan's turn. Percy.

LIAM: Damn it.

TALIESIN: Laser. I'm going to take my laser.

MATT: Your laser? Point your laser? (Liam imitates ray gun)

TALIESIN: All right, I want to crawl forward to the other side of Grog over there, so I can see this little jerk.

MATT: It's a tough call, he has cover. You can still see him.

TALIESIN: I ignore cover. It's one of my magical things that I do.

LIAM: Three-quarters cover according to the new rules.

MARISHA: Yeah, he's got a gun.

TALIESIN: Yeah, I ignore half or three-quarters cover.

MATT: Then you can ignore three-quarters cover, which he has. So, yes.

TALIESIN: Okay, I ignore it. I'm also going to take a penalty to my attack bonus to attempt to do some damage and to not kill, but injure, if possible.

MATT: Okay.

TALIESIN: I wanna leave one for questioning.

MATT: Okay. So go ahead and roll disadvantage on this attack. Or do you want to just do subdual damage, which is what you're doing?

TALIESIN: Yeah. All right, so you're gonna aim in a way that doesn't do lethal damage. Go for it.

MATT: It's a normal attack, there's no penalty to it.

TALIESIN: Just my penalty for extra damage.

MATT: Mm hm.

TALIESIN: Aha! I crit! So that's fun. Let's roll damage. Nine, 10, that's 25 points of damage.

LAURA: Yeah!

MATT: 25 points of damage. All right, you run around the corner, pull the gun out, and aim at this like-- (coughs) Where you look now, you see this ghastly looking, evil, female-looking grey-skinned dwarf. Looks over at you and (gasps) reacts and goes for her weapon. As you do, you let loose and fire straight into her shoulder, blasting through most of her shoulder, exposing bone. It's not a deahtblow, but you see she has been incapacitated.

ORION: Nice.

TALIESIN: That's my turn.

LAURA: I call out, "Let one of them live, so I can question them."

TALIESIN: That's-- we got one.

MATT: Keyleth, you're up.

MARISHA: We got one?

TALIESIN: We got one.

MARISHA: Well, then.

MATT: That dwarf survived. With one hit point.

MARISHA: If we got the guy we need. I will move over a bit. Yeah. And... (imitates energy firing)

MATT: All right, go for it.

LIAM: Vines?

MATT: First off, make a constitution save, 'cause you stepped into a stinking cloud. Unless you wanna move back here. There you go.

MARISHA: Not having control.

MATT: Laser pointer.

MARISHA: I do (mumbles). Okay. So that is... what is that? 22?

MATT: 22 points of damage. All right. So the bolt streaks from the cloud in the sky, slamming into this other duergar. As it sparks into the ground, you see bits of stone get thrown up from the sheer force of the bolt, doing a sincere amount of damage to it. Not enough to finish it, but it looks very, very fucked up. You can see part of its face is charred now, and it's reeling from the blast. Probably blew out its eardrums from the cacophonous blast of the thunder.

MARISHA: That's my turn.

MATT: That's your turn. It's now both of their turn. They both failed their saves with a two and a four. They're both still hacking and coughing in the stinking cloud. Uh, go bards. Vax, you're up.

LIAM: Okay, and there's a big cloud of poo stink around them, so--

MATT: Correct, so all here.

ORION: "The poo cloud," Keyleth calls it.

LIAM: God dammit. All right.

MARISHA: Do I? "The poo cloud."

LIAM: Fuck it.

SAM: Just go in there, man.

LIAM: I'm gonna hold my breath, and I'm gonna go one, two, three, four, five, and grab this guy around the neck and hold my daggers to his neck. And just hunker down and try to hold him hostage.

MATT: Okay. Go ahead and make a constitution check.

TRAVIS: A dirty mafia check?

LIAM: Is that a, is that a--

MATT: With advantage, because you're holding your breath.

LIAM: Okay. 14.

TRAVIS: Just breathe it in.

SAM: Use the dice! Use the dice!

LIAM: What did you give me?

SAM: A d8.

LIAM: 22.

SAM: No, it's not an eight. A d8. You gotta roll it.

MATT: Roll a d8 to add to it.

LIAM: 15.

(group laughs)

LIAM: It came up a one.

TRAVIS: 22!

MATT: So, as you rush in the cloud, (breathes deeply) you run in, pull your daggers out, and because this isn't a natural cloud, the arcane force puts it in your nostrils and you can't help yourself. (coughs) Your turn immediately ends as you begin feeling your lunch retching up into your stomach.

TRAVIS: Puke on him.

MATT: Okay. That brings us to Grog. You are a--

TRAVIS: Oh, I got it. (blows raspberry)

MATT: You are brain-dead.

(group laughs) Tiberius, you're up.

LAURA: So sorry, Grog.

SAM: Can we heal him, what is it? What do we need to do?

MARISHA: We'll figure that out when we kill this guy, I guess.

LAURA: Restoration?

LIAM: Can you dispel that shit?

SAM: I tried, I tried.

MARISHA: He can't dispel it, It's not magic. But I might be able to cure him afterwards.

LIAM: Tiberius, can you dispel that shit?

ORION: It's the same spell.

LAURA: It's a restoration spell, it's not a dispel.

MARISHA: I might be able to.

ORION: So, the guy knocked down over there is-- let me see that pointer. This guy, that's the one that we knocked out with the arrow?

TALIESIN: Yeah, that's the dead one.

ORION: The dead one or the one we knocked out?

TALIESIN: He's dead.

ORION: Who do we have incapacitated?

TALIESIN: That's the one we shot.

MARISHA: That's the one Liam has.

LAURA: Let one live.

ORION: And the one right here is...?

LIAM: The one by me is weak.

MATT: Both of them are pretty weak right now, actually.

ORION: I think I can step next to Percy without stepping into that cloud.

MATT: So you can step over Grog, get around here, you mean?

LAURA: (laughs) Honk.

TRAVIS: That's-- come on.

ORION: Sorry, excuse me, Grog, pardon. I will shoot a firebolt at the butthole across the way.

MATT: There? All right. Go ahead and roll for the attack.

ORION: 14.

MATT: 14. Unfortunately does not hit. You aim, and it manages to just pull out of the way.

LAURA: Oh my gosh.

MATT: Vex. You're up.

LAURA: Me?

MATT: Yes.

LAURA: I step over, and I try to shoot the one that he just-- I stay out of the stink.

MATT: There you go, yeah. Pull back-- (imitates bow shooting arrow)

LAURA: All right.

MATT: Roll to attack.

LAURA: 23.

MATT: That hits, go ahead and roll damage.

LAURA: Eight.

MATT: That's enough. As the arrow (imitates arrow flying), careens off, slams into the chest. (groans) It catches itself, steps back, and plummets off the side of the cliff onto the lower floor about 20 feet down. Smack, onto the ground.

LAURA: And I ask Scanlan to dispel the stank cloud.

TALIESIN: Dispel the stank.

LAURA: And I yell-- Can I yell out "surrender" in Undercommon?

MATT: You yell out, (speaks angry gibberish)!

(Laura speaks angry gibberish)

MATT: Make an intimidation check.

TRAVIS: That was a very good Klingon translation.

LAURA: Klingon. (Liam speaks angry gibberish) Whoa! Okay. Um, eight.

MATT: Eight?

LAURA: Eight.

LIAM: What is with the dice tonight?

MATT: It rolled a one.

(group cheers)

MATT: It looks around and its circumstances being extremely dire. It drops its weapons, falls to its knees. At your mercy. That's where we'll end the game tonight.

SAM: Oh!

TALIESIN: Hey!

TRAVIS: What?!

MATT: Yeah.

LAURA: You're, you're-- yeah.

SAM: Grog is brain dead.

MARISHA: I was gonna say, can I go over and heal Grog before we end?

TRAVIS: I'm Vanilla Sky right now.

MATT: Nope, we're picking up next week.

LAURA: Oh no.

LIAM: Just five more hours, Matt. Just five more hours.

MATT: We'll say for the circumstance here, you go ahead and spend a healing spell on him. His wounds mend, no effect on his catatonic state.

(group groans)


SAM: We have to wait a week.

MATT: Well guys, that's episode two of Critical Role. (laughs)

MARISHA: Damn it.

MATT: I hope you enjoyed it. Remember to tell your friends to come watch. We'll be back next week, Thursday at 7:00. I know the schedule said seven to nine. We usually run a little later. Because D&D and why not?

LAURA: Oh, is this seven to nine?

MATT: It says seven to nine in the schedule, but we consider seven to ten. But yeah, hope you guys had fun. Thank you so much for watching. Hope we will have our donations up next week. Feel free to check it out. This is Zac, our amazing master of all awesomeness on this Twitch channel. Hey Zac, what's going on?

ZAC: Hey, good job, guys.

MATT: Thank you, thank you.

ZAC: You got a thousand subscribers.

(group cheers)

ZAC: Crazy, that's like, two weeks in.

MATT: Yeah, I know. You go, Nyal. We'll get you your stuff.

MARISHA: Yeah, you get a Player's Handbook. That's lucky.

ZAC: We'll get you your shit! I gotta print that photo so you guys can all sign it.

MATT: Yes yes, let's go do that.

ZAC: No, it'll probably be sent to you next Friday, 'cause we'll have you guys sign it next Thursday.

LAURA: Sounds good.

MATT: Okay, cool.

TRAVIS: Zac, do you have any renew intelligence potions on you, by chance?

ZAC: For you?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

ZAC: No.

TRAVIS: Shit.

MATT: Sorry buddy.

ZAC: So we're not going offline for the night yet. These guys are gonna head out and Lucas and I are gonna play some Hotline Miami 2. For an hour, hour and a half.

MATT: There you go, rock it out.

ZAC: You know, just to close out the night with a subscriber-only chat to say thank you to our thousand subscribers. And tomorrow night we will be back with So You Don't Have to, which is a show where Hector and Becca play the weirdest games they can find online, so you don't have to.

MARISHA: Nice. (Matt laughs)

ZAC: And then we finish off tomorrow night with Gather Your Party, which is just a big party where we're going to be celebrating getting 1,000 subscribers, playing some board games. We have a band coming in to play.

MATT: Awesome.

ZAC: It's gonna be a good time. We might even have a DJ spinning some-- I don't know. How do you say it? Spinning?

TRAVIS: Some tunes.

MATT: Spin tunes.

TRAVIS: Dropping some dope beats.

ORION: On the ones and twos. Ones and twos.

ZAC: So thank you guys again. Lucas, if you wanna go ahead and roll those videos, and we'll get you guys out of here.

MATT: Thank you guys for watching.

ALL: Bye! 

Part I

MATT: Hey, everyone. Sorry about that little issue there. But thank you for your patience. I appreciate that. Going back over what had transpired previously. So the party was hired to go into Kraghammer seeking Lady Kima of Vord, who is a renowned folk hero, a halfling paladin of much renown, following Bahamut, the Platinum Dragon of justice and good, who went on a vision quest, apparently seeing some sort of evil brewing beneath Kraghammer, and went on her own to seek it and destroy it. Hasn't been seen for many weeks– months, even – since. And so the party has then gone into Kraghammer to attempt to locate her. After some conversing, some brawling, some interesting circumstances, they found information that she disappeared into the Mithril mines just underneath the lower circle of Kraghammer. They've since battled a few creatures, apparently these strange monstrosities are coming out of the mines recently. And they've had dwarven miners being taken and disappearing. They charged into the mines, found one of the series of tunnels that had broken into the mines from some other source, encountered a few umber hulks, were ambushed by some duergar, which are subterranean, dark, ashen grey–

TRAVIS: Dickholes.

MATT: – messed-up dwarves and an intellect devourer, which proceeded to blast Grog, reduce his intelligence to zero, and leave him catatonic and brain-dead.

TRAVIS: (laughs)

MATT: And that's where we left off. But we'll pick up that in a second. Let's go ahead and continue our introductions. We had Taliesin, now we have Marisha–

MARISHA: Yes! Hello, I am Marisha Ray, and I am Keyleth of the Air Ashari tribe. And I am the Circle of the Moon druid. Level nine.

MATT: Mm-hm.

TRAVIS: Wow.

MATT: Orion?

ORION: Hi! I am Orion Acaba. And I play Tiberius Stormwind, the dragonborn sorcerer. Level nine. Super badass.

TRAVIS: Scaly.

SAM: Oh hi, I am Sam Riegel. I play Scanlan Shorthalt, the level nine bard gnome, who is the handsomest and most charming of the group.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Scanlan Shorthalt.

SAM: Scanlan Shorthalt.

MATT: Yeah. Esquire.

LAURA: The third.

MATT: Yes, the third.

LAURA: Hi! Oh, my brother is extra, extra stealth right now.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

LAURA: But I play Vex'ahlia, who is a half-elf ranger, and I have an amazing–

SAM: Ranger!

LAURA: – companion bear named Trinket, who is basically the coolest ever. And he's good at everything he does. I'm okay. But he's excellent.

MATT: He's really, really good. Yeah.

TRAVIS: I'm Grog Strongjaw. I'm a goliath barbarian, level nine.

LAURA: Oh, I didn't say that. Level nine.

TRAVIS: I have an intelligence of six normally, but now it's negative two.

LAURA: Oh!

TRAVIS: And my brain is made of applesauce.

LAURA: Poor Grog!

MATT: Liam, who is not here yet, but will be here shortly but–

TRAVIS: He's peeing.

MATT: He is peeing, and what's–

ORION: Oh my god.

TRAVIS: On a tree.

MATT: And when he returns we'll get to his introduction as well.

TRAVIS: Stealthily.

MATT: And Ashley Johnson, who has missed the last couple of games because she's been filming, when she returns will be playing Pike.

LAURA: Hey!

TALIESIN: Hey!

MATT: Who is a cleric. Our gnome cleric. Liam's arrived! Huzzah!

LAURA: We're just introducing ourselves, that's all.

MATT: Exactly! It's okay, we've had technical difficulties, so.

ORION: Oh, hey, he made the introductions, folks.

LAURA: Oh, hi, Mark, welcome to the game.

LIAM: Oh, hi.

MATT: Before we start too, just a couple quick announcements. A couple cool games that have come out recently that some of us have been involved with. Today was the launch of Pillars of Eternity, a completely awesome kind of successor to Baldur's Gate. Both me and Liam are part of that as well. Those who are playing through, I voice Aloth and Adair. Liam, if you remember any characters you voiced in it.

LIAM: The guy.

MATT: The guy.

LAURA: (laughs)

MATT: He voices the guy. We're scattered throughout the game so just– If you can't get enough of us here, you'll be really hating our voices by playing through that. And then also, Orion–

ORION: Oh, yeah. On a more radder note, Final Fantasy Type-0–you should play– is out also. I play Nine. In that.

MATT: Yeah.

ORION: And Matthew Mercer plays Trey in it as well.

MATT: Yeah.

LIAM: I thought seven ate nine.

LAURA: We're all pimping our shizz.

ORION: Seven does maybe eat nine. Who knows?

MATT: Oh.

LIAM: I'm a dad.

MARISHA: (laughs) I'm a dad.

ORION: Who knows, but it's definitely a different take on any Final Fantasy you've ever played. And as a fan, I'm excited, so check it out, too.

MATT: Yeah, it's legit awesome. So a lot of cool, exciting things.

LIAM: Also, this one's in Tales from the Borderlands being awesome.

LAURA: Oh, yeah.

MATT: Yeah.

LAURA: Episode two just came out.

MATT: That's right! Congrats!

LAURA: Yes.

SAM: And I'll be playing at the Laugh Barn in St. Louis.

(all laugh)

ORION: Every Tuesday.

SAM: Three. Three nights. Three nights sold out.

ORION: Three nights.

SAM: Opening for Carrot Top.

ORION: Check it out.

MATT: All right. Well, guys, let's go get down to brass tacks. So, last we left off, in a subterranean cavern with a deep underground river flowing through it. Pitch darkness. You managed to survive a conflict with two umber hulks, thanks to Polymorph and some good tactics. However, Grog then charged headlong towards a light source– turned out to be a campfire across the way– where he walked into an ambush by a few duergar which began shooting him with crossbow bolts. And an intellect devourer made him brain-dead. You guys–

LAURA: He's got nobody to blame but himself.

MATT: Kind of, that's okay. Grog owns it– as you can see by his glasses. So.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: I love those.

MATT: So. We're beginning now as Grog has collapsed, face down on the ground, drooling.

LIAM: The future's so bright.

MATT: The last of the duergar have been blown off the cliff or destroyed. You all rush in, and find Grog not moving, not responding, not anything.

TRAVIS: Somebody pretty give me CPR.

LAURA: Don't talk.

TRAVIS: Okay.

SAM: Grog! Grog, can you hear us?

LAURA: I rush down–

SAM: Can you feel us near you?

LAURA: – and slap him on the face a few times.

MATT: You slap him.

SAM: Nothing.

MATT: You slap him.

SAM: Nothing.

MATT: You slap him. No response.

SAM: Someone, quick! Draw a dick on his face!

MARISHA: I also bend down and slap him a few times.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: And then I say, I knew it wouldn't work. I just– Dammit, Grog!

TALIESIN: I'm going to actually try a crude medical examination to see if I can–

SAM: Ooh, investigation check?

TRAVIS: So here's your numbers.

MATT: Okay.

TALIESIN: And yes! This is nice. 19.

MATT: A 19 on the medicine?

TALIESIN: On the medicine, yeah.

MATT: Okay.

TRAVIS: You leave my prostate alone.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: After I palpate the region.

MATT: A thorough goliath cavity search later–

MARISHA: Ohh.

MATT: You find some stray gold pieces.

LIAM: There's where that pony went!

TALIESIN: That's a very deep belly button you have there, my god!

MATT: The goliath physicality's a little difficult.

LIAM: Found the troll dick!

LAURA: Ohh.

MATT: Looking over him, and there's very little physical damage to him. He shrugs it off pretty easily. There's no notable sign or anything other than the fact that his eyes aren't reacting to anything. It looks like he is catatonic.

TALIESIN: No bleeding from the ear? No bleeding from the nose?

MATT: Nope.

TALIESIN: I'm going to go take a look at the remnants of the brain creature.

MATT: All right. What bits of the currently thawing chunks of it– blasted apart by Tiberius' Glacial Blast– It appears to be tougher than normal, but very similar to gray matter in appearance and texture. Other than these strange, kind of reddish-brown bestial legs that were once attached to its mid-section are now blown apart and cast to the ground. The whole texture seems very slimy and rubbery.

LAURA: Ew.

MATT: And it's much larger than any natural brain should be. It's probably– When it was all in one piece, it would have been roughly about the size of a small dog.

LAURA: Do any of us know anything about magic that could heal him? Like any spells.

MATT: Do you?

LAURA: I mean–

MARISHA: I think I might–

ORION: It's clear that when that brain thing hit Grog with his zapper thing, that it rendered him unconscious. I would assume that it is a magical creature, just based on the attack alone.

LAURA: Thank you, Tiberius.

MARISHA: Anything we should know?

SAM: Excellent assessment, Tiberius.

LAURA: Thank you.

ORION: Quite right.

TALIESIN: He got zapped and now he's unconscious.

SAM: A shorter way of saying the same thing.

LAURA: Maybe we should try– Does anybody have any healing? I know Pike isn't here, but–

MARISHA: I–

ORION: You have something, don't you?

MARISHA: I think I have a spell. That might be able to help. I don't know it right now though. We'd have to take a break. I'd have to pull out my books and relearn it. It takes some time.

LIAM: How much time do you need?

MARISHA: Need to sleep on it.

LAURA: How– Can we–

TRAVIS: As they talk, Grog slowly flatulates.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: (fart sound)

SAM: It happens, it's natural.

MATT: It's terrible.

LAURA: Oh! It's another– What is it? An ass cloud? Is that what it was?

MATT: Yeah.

SAM: Poo. Poo cloud.

LAURA: Lovely.

LIAM: Everybody make a constitution saving throw.

LAURA: Yeah, a constitution saving–

ORION: How many entrances– How many ways or edges where we are? Because it's like at the center, anyway–

MATT: Yeah, you're currently basically on the precipice of a large cavern that has multiple layers as the river kind of cascades off into multiple waterfalls. As far as you can see– which isn't far good because there's no other light source beyond you guys– the cavern just continues indefinitely for a good 60 feet and then just vanishes into darkness.

LAURA: Well, maybe we should sleep. Try to camp

for the time–

SAM: Well, we'll need to form a perimeter and someone will have to stand guard–

MATT: Well, currently you're holding a barely alive duergar hostage.

LAURA: (gasps) Oh! Right! I forgot about that!

SAM: Oh, we gotta interrogate.

LAURA: We gotta interrogate him! Her.

LAURA and SAM: It.

MATT: It's a female.

LIAM: Female.

LAURA: And I can speak its language.

MATT: You do.

LIAM: Hers.

MATT: You speak Undercommon.

LAURA: Hers.

MATT: First thing you note, too: it is female, and it takes a moment to register that because she is also bald on top.

LIAM: It. Terrible.

LAURA: Sorry.

MATT: Nasty, pale, kind of sunken face. Eyes are completely clouded over and white, no pupils. Teeth are kind of yellow and gnarled and sharp.

SAM: How close to death's door is she?

LIAM: What's this?

LAURA: What?

LIAM: Thank you, sir.

MARISHA: Oh my gosh.

LAURA: Oh, thank you, wonderful people!

CREW: There's more coming, this is the vegan pizza.

ORION: Whoa!

LAURA: What?

ORION: Where's it coming?

LAURA: Thank you, chat room!

TRAVIS: Thank you, chat room.

ORION: Chat room!

SAM: Chat room? Chat room bought us a pizza?

MARISHA: Thanks, guys!

MATT: You guys are awesome! Thank you so much!

LIAM: You knew I liked jalapenos.

LAURA: Vegan pizza? Are you kidding me?

MARISHA: And donuts!

MATT: Oh yeah.

TALIESIN: Pizza made it.

LAURA: Look at those chocolate cakes! Oh.

ORION: (laughs) Oh.

SAM: All right, all right. This creature is very injured. I think we need to heal her just enough–

LAURA: Heal her?

SAM: Just enough.

LIAM: Not so fast, not so fast.

LAURA: We'll heal her after she talks.

LIAM: Is she unconscious?

SAM: Why don't you make that bargain then–

LIAM: I've got dagger to her throat and I'm hold–She's bald?

MATT: Bald, yes.

LIAM: All right, so I've got an arm around the top of her forehead in–

MATT: (hisses)

LAURA: Don't kill her. I need her.

LIAM: She's not unconscious, right?

MATT: No.

LAURA: I got up–

MATT: She's got a huge shoulder wound.

LIAM: All right, I call my sister over. I'll hold her, you talk.

LAURA: What did you do to our friend?

MATT: “I didn't do anything. That was the brain's work.” (chuckles)

LAURA: What did the brain work do to our friend?

MARISHA: Brain twerk?

MATT: “Took care of your friend. He's gone now. He's all dead inside. Kaputski.”

LAURA: What are you here for?

MATT: “Just creating a mess.”

LAURA: What should I fucking ask her? I say that in our language, not–

(all laugh)

LAURA: What should I ask?

TALIESIN: How do we fix it?

LAURA: How do we– (lowers voice) How do we fix it?

TALIESIN: There you go.

MATT: “Bury your dead weight.”

LIAM: I press the blade a little tighter.

MATT: “Ugh! Gah!”

LIAM: Dig in. Maybe one hit point worth of–

LAURA: No, no! She's only got one hit point left.

LIAM: She's only got one?

MATT: She's got one hit point.

LIAM: All right.

LAURA: Don't do that!

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Is she bleeding?

MATT: Profusely. From the shoulder.

TALIESIN: Oh! In that case, I'm going to cauterize the wounds. There's more than one way to make someone talk!

LAURA: Ugh.

TALIESIN: I'm going to shoot my gun off– get it nice and hot right at the tip and start cauterizing the wounds.

MATT: Okay so (gunshot). And the flash goes off. The sound of blast echoes throughout the entirety of the cavern. You can hear (echoing gunshot) cascade off.

MARISHA: A little warning next time!

MATT: He takes the barrel, slams it into the shoulder and the sizzling sound as she reaches back in pain. Make an intimidation check.

TALIESIN: I'm intimidated.

LAURA: What should we ask her?

TALIESIN: Aha ha! 21!

MATT: 21? All right. She's now, like, breathing heavy.

ORION: I'm using my Mage Hand to poke her in the face.

MATT: She's trying to move her face out of the way but she can't seem to avoid the mystical arcane finger pokes.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Look, we haven't got all day. How do we fix it–

LAURA: Who do you work for?

TALIESIN: And who do you work for?

MATT: “You fell, surface-slime. You've already fallen, and the Master's gathered the sheep. You shall all be harvested for K'varn!”

ORION: Ah, is he a farmer?

SAM: You can't understand her. Only she can.

LAURA: You can't understand!

ORION: Oh.

LAURA: Who is K'varn? Does anybody know?

SAM: No, is that a thing? Is that a person?

LAURA: I don't know. I don't know. I've got–

TALIESIN: Can I roll history on that or is

that–?

LAURA: Who is K'varn?

ORION: The Carvers!

MATT: You can roll history, if you like.

TALIESIN: All right.

LAURA: Argh, who is K'varn?

MATT: “K'varn is the one that rules these caverns. The one who guides us to take the surface back!”

LAURA: To take the surface back?

TALIESIN: A 14 in history wouldn't do anything?

MATT: No.

LAURA: Is K'varn the one making creepy zombie monsters?

MATT: “K'varn likes to tinker with the fleshlings, yes.”

LAURA: Where is K'varn located? Point the direction.

MATT: Looks over her shoulder back towards the darker part of the cavern where you guys haven't traversed. “Deep. Deep.”

SAM: What is K'varn?

LAURA: What. Is. K'varn?

MATT: “You'll see.”

LAURA: No, you'll tell me now.

TRAVIS: Good question.

LAURA: I slap her across the face.

MATT: Argh!

LAURA: Lightly! Not enough to make her lose a hit point.

ORION: I poke her more!

(all laugh)

MARISHA: It's like a Three Stooges act.

MATT: “My life is already forfeit.”

MARISHA: Oh!

MATT: “I'm just relishing your faces, for they will be gnarled and twisted soon enough!”

LAURA: Break her legs. Leave her here.

MATT: You break her–

LAURA: Heal her. Maybe we should heal her–

MATT: (laughs)

LAURA: And let her lay there. Is that evil? That's pretty evil.

TRAVIS: What's your alignment? I mean–

LAURA: My alignment. I'm good.

TALIESIN: She did just help–

MARISHA: Wait! Ask her if she's seen Nostoc. Or if they've seen–

LAURA: Oh yes!

MARISHA: Or, yeah, if they've seen our paladin friend. Our little–

TALIESIN: Lady Kima.

MARISHA: Lady Kima!

LAURA: Before we end your life, tell us, have you seen a small halfling?

MATT: You see a moment of recognition in the female duergar's face, and it's– “There was a halfling, aye. She was foolish enough to come down here alone. She's dead now.”

SAM: (gasps)

MATT: “We've taken her life and it was delicious.”

LIAM: I drag her to her feet. Walk her over to the edge of the cliff where the water is, and hold her. Knife still at her neck. Tell this one: Now's her last chance to give us anything useful to lead to her boss, I guess.

LAURA: All right. It's your last chance. Give us something useful? And we'll end this painlessly. Don't, and we'll make you suffer.

MATT: Make an intimidation check.

LAURA: All right. Ooh, my new dice! Ooh! C'mon, baby!

LIAM: I'm going to assist her by taking my other dagger and letting it drip poison down the blade.

MATT: (laughs)

LIAM: Advantage? Advantage?

LAURA: Intimidation of 14?

LIAM: Assist?

MATT: Go ahead and roll dice.

LIAM: Me?

MATT: You, yes.

LAURA: (squeaky voice) To assist me?

LIAM: 19.

MATT: 19. Okay, go ahead and roll again.

LAURA: Oh.

LIAM: Drip drip drip drip drip.

MATT: I'm giving you the advantage on the roll because he has a blade to her now.

LAURA: Oh, okay. Okay, still 14.

MATT: Still 14.

LAURA: I should've rolled my other one. To see. Just to see.

MATT: She laughs and says: “Your friend's dead! All is lost! You came for nothing!”

SAM: Can I tell if she's lying? Is it–

MATT: Make an insight check.

SAM: Insight check? Oop. No. (laughs)

LAURA: Okay, can I see if she's lying?

MATT: You can also make an insight check as well.

LAURA: All right, cool.

LIAM: I can't understand what the– What the hell's she saying?

LAURA: Okay, that's way better! 24!

MATT: 24. She is definitively lying through her teeth.

LAURA: (gasps)

MATT: Just to hurt you.

LAURA: Yes! We know you're lying!

(all laugh)

MATT: “What?”

LAURA: Yes! I don't know what else to ask her, guys. I don't know what else to ask her.

TRAVIS: What are goblins afraid of?

MATT: She looks at you for a second, goes, “Regardless, we have her. She's down below. And, soon enough, “you'll see. You'll see what shall become of this halfling.”

LAURA: We'll rescue her! And we're going to kill your god!

(all laugh)

LIAM: I did it, I did it.

MATT: An ichor spray comes across.

SAM: Ugh!

LAURA: That was the worst thing.

TALIESIN: The most awkward throat-slitting I've ever heard of.

SAM: That was very fast.

MARISHA: We're going to kill your god. Wait.

TALIESIN: Wait.

MARISHA: Fuck it, just go with it!

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Commit!

MATT: As the body goes limp in your hands, you kinda let it tumble over the waterfall.

LIAM: Yeah.

LAURA: Good times. Good times, guys.

MATT: Um, now you guys are standing over Grog in this kind of makeshift–

LIAM: It's a little sticky, slimy?

MATT: – camp site. The embers of the fire kinda going low.

LIAM: I'm starved.

TALIESIN: Well, she's researching–

LAURA: Oh!

MARISHA: Yes.

LAURA: Should we keep– I'm going to keep watch.

LIAM: Absolutely.

LAURA: With Trinket.

SAM: We need to–

MARISHA: Do we have any idea what time it is?

MATT: At this point? It's at some point in the evening.

MARISHA: All right.

SAM: Let's rest. Let's set up a perimeter and take turns standing guard. I'm going to go to the next cavern over to where we killed those umber hulks?

MATT: Yes.

SAM: Take one of the umber hulk heads and put it on a stick.

LAURA: Ooh.

SAM: Right out front of where we're– Of where we're camping as sort of a warning to others.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: I want to check out–

LAURA: How about this?

ORION: How many cavern entrances are there from where we're camping?

MATT: From where you are?

(creepy music sound effect)

LAURA: Oh no!

MATT: There are where you came in through–

ORION: Right.

MATT: Strange things afoot echo in the silence. There's the entrance you came in. Across the way, there appears to be another cavern that you can kinda see the entrance to. Those are the only proper openings into this giant chamber. Otherwise there's just the giant, over-arching cave that you guys are just getting into. Just pushing through, so–

MARISHA: I'm gonna take the first watch–

LAURA: Oh, you are! Okay.

MARISHA: I still have a lot of reading to do, and I can go ahead– I'm gonna go ahead and cast– Make sure everybody's in! Everybody's in.

LAURA: Wait, wait! I want to check the bodies of the other guys before the–

SAM: What are you casting? What are you about to cast?

MATT: Duergar?

LAURA: Yeah.

MARISHA: Anti-Life Shell?

MATT: Go ahead and make an investigative check.

MARISHA: A shell that keeps in anything from coming in.

SAM: Oh. Great. Well, before you do that, hold on.

LAURA: A 20?

MATT: Okay. Glancing about, you pull roughly 125 gold pieces between the three corpses of the duergar. Well, two corpses because one of them is gone. It washed downstream.

LAURA: Right.

LIAM: She had all the good things.

LAURA: She had a lot of good stuff on her.

MATT: Yeah. You do, however, find on one of them a gnarled implement of some kind, whether it be scavenged or not. It's of a strange, like almost bleached bone ivory that comes to a point at one end.

ORION: Ooh.

SAM: Let's look at it. (laughs)

MATT: It is pretty.

LAURA: Ooh, let me see, let me see.

ORION: An artifact we can bring back to–

SAM: Can I take a look at it and–

LIAM: Give it to Tiberius. He'll try anything.

MARISHA: (laughs) He'll try anything.

SAM: History or– or arcane?

ORION: I like trying things.

MATT: Go ahead and roll arcana.

SAM: Arcana. No! (laughs)

MARISHA: (laughs) Oh, Scanlan.

MATT: Scanlan, it is a very pretty something.

ORION: 24.

MATT: 24. Want to hand it over to him?

ORION: Yes, I–

SAM: Ooh!

LAURA: What is it?

SAM: Nothing.

ORION: Wonderful, this is. Wonderful. Magic Missiles, of course.

MARISHA: (laughs)

SAM: It sends out magic missiles!

LAURA: What!

ORION: This one has seven charges. While holding it, you, you can use an action to expend one or more of its charges to cast the Magic Missile spell from it. For one charge, you cast the first-level version of the spell. You can increase the spell slot by one for each level by each additional charge you expend. The wand regains 1d6 plus one expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll a d20. On a one, the wand crumples into ashes and then–

LIAM: This all seems very technical.

LAURA: Yes, that's awesome–

SAM: Basically it shoots out six missiles and then it–

LAURA: Awesome!

TRAVIS: Isn't that a famous, like–

MARISHA: It goes pew pew!

LAURA: I'm glad we killed them before they used that on us.

LIAM: Yes, it's pretty standard.

TALIESIN: It's a pew pew stick.

LIAM: Pretty standard.

MARISHA: It's a pew pew stick!

LIAM: Yes.

MARISHA: Cool!

ORION: Would anybody like to tinker? I mean, I learned this when I was 12.

(all laugh)

LAURA: No, you're unconscious.

ORION: Oh, I'll hold onto it–

LAURA: Well, yeah. Yeah.

LIAM: I think Grog may have soiled himself a little. We should probably get Keyleth on the books.

LAURA: Take a nap so that, maybe–

TALIESIN: Yes.

MARISHA: Make sure everyone's in and close by, and get done with everything.

LAURA: Okay, she's gonna–

LIAM: Keyleth, you need to study, so we'll take first watch.

MARISHA: I'm gonna take you guys–

LAURA: Oh, that's true, you should study while we watch.

LIAM: You can't study and watch.

MARISHA: I'm gonna cast Anti-Life Shell. That way everyone at least gets one good hour of sleep.

LAURA: Oh, good! I like it!

LIAM: All right, let's take a nap.

LAURA: All right.

MATT: You go ahead and you eventually find one of the corpses of the umber hulk. It takes you a good 25 minutes to eventually carve through its relatively thick hide, chitinous exterior. You put the head on a makeshift spike, and it is now there on display.

SAM: Yes, as a warning to others.

MATT: You feel accomplished.

SAM: Yes.

MATT: You head back. Keyleth–

TALIESIN: Terrible taxidermy attempt.

MATT: – as you are taking first watch, you notice that the campsite that the duergar were using, where you guys are currently resting for the evening, it's been there for a while and it looks like the duergar have repurposed it. The fire– the stones that were set up around the actual fire pit have probably been there for quite some time, and were set up very uniformly and very well placed. Right above you, on one of the stone walls, you see what appears to be a strange, very well carved symbol. Hard to recognize it. Go ahead and make a religion check.

LAURA: Oh, man.

MARISHA: Ugh, wish Pike were here.

LIAM: Yes, we wish Pike was here.

LAURA: Pike's missing everything! (sobs)

TALIESIN: Very much.

ORION: Yes. We miss you!

MARISHA: Eight?

LIAM: Come back, little gnome!

MATT: It's just a really interesting carving on the wall just right above where you guys are currently residing–

TALIESIN: Ampersand.

MARISHA: So pretty!

MATT: Not quite catching your attention, but it seems to have some significance. And it's fresh, it's not like an ancient symbol that's been there, it maybe could have been there for more than a week or two.

MARISHA: I go ahead and I take a piece of paper from my spellbook, and I take a piece of charcoal, and I just scroll over top of it.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: To get an imprint of it.

MATT: Okay, it's very big. It's like four feet by three feet.

MARISHA: I take a few pieces of paper, and I kind of glue them together-

(all laugh)

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: – and then I get a really big one, and then I roll it up.

MATT: All right. All right, you guys begin to set up for the next watch. After the first hour–

MARISHA: And I have my Anti-Life Shell up.

MATT: Yep, Anti-Life Shell eventually fades, first hour without any impact or issue.

MARISHA: Who is taking the next watch?

LAURA: Oh, we are.

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: Okay. The next few hours go by without incident.

LAURA: That's nice. Can I look around and see– I mean, no! In our area! I'm not gonna wander off, but just to see if I see any kind of anything interesting. I mean, if this is a really old area that I've noticed, it's old, can I see anything cool and old around us?

MATT: Well, there's a lot of mineral deposits. This place in particular, it's definitely, because of the heavy river flow for a long time, a lot of the area near the river itself, very smooth stone. A lot of kind of accumulated deposits of various

elements. You also catch the strange carved symbol right atop your guys' camp.

LAURA: Okay. So I tap my brother and go, look at this. Do you know anything about religion?

LIAM: (sighs) Well, let me see.

LAURA: Let me see.

(all laugh)

LIAM: Well, I seem to know fuck-all about it. Ten.

LAURA: Oh, me too! I know shit about it.

MATT: It's a very fancy symbol.

LAURA: It's a really pretty symbol.

MATT: You guys finish your watch–

LIAM: I really wish Pike was here.

MARISHA: Just, the party is taking turns being like, so pretty!

LAURA: I know!

SAM: Where was that symbol?

LAURA: On a rock.

MARISHA: It's above our–

MATT: It's on one of the large cave surfaces near where you guys are camping.

LAURA: I don't see any cool sparkly things in the mineral deposits? None of that?

MATT: Nothing catches your attention–

LAURA: Damn it!

MATT: — at the moment, no, unfortunately.

LIAM: All about the bling.

LAURA: I am about the bling.

MARISHA: How's it going over there, Grog?

MATT: You finish your watch without issue.

MARISHA: It's good.

MATT: Next up watch, this is the last, third, and final watch you guys are now going through.

ORION: Oh, all right.

SAM: I'll come with Tiberius as well.

MATT: Okay.

TALIESIN: Yeah, we'll all go.

SAM: Okay.

MATT: Okay. The three of you guys keep watch. After they're napping. Occasionally you have to adjust Grog, 'cause you're not sure if he's still breathing.

ORION: I'll roll for the–

TRAVIS: What?

SAM: Not sure if he's still breathing?

ORION: I'm gonna do an intelligence, right?

MATT: To make sure he's still–

LAURA: What?

MARISHA: Religion. Religion.

MATT: Religion.

ORION: 20.

LAURA: Oh my god, what if you could die while we're sleeping?

MATT: Right now, you just rolled?

ORION: Well, 18 plus two.

MATT: Oh, okay.

ORION: What's that?

MATT: You are familiar with this symbol specifically because of your background. That is the symbol of Bahamut. It is the symbol of the Platinum Dragon.

LAURA: Ooh!

MATT: And you ascertain it was probably–

ORION: Oh, it looks like this!

MATT: Yes.

ORION: Oh, interesting.

MATT: And it was probably used as part of some sort of a protection ritual.

LAURA: What was the name of the bad guy that she said?

MATT: K'varn.

ORION: I tell everybody that. Well, that I'm with.

LAURA: Thank you.

MATT: Using the thing you wrote.

LAURA: K'varn.

MATT: K'varn.

LAURA: I'm gonna guess that's how you spell it.

ORION: It seems it's a protective symbol of sorts, but it's of Bahamut, which is a good thing.

LAURA: K'vah? I thought it was K'varn.

SAM: It's a good thing?

ORION: Bahamut is the essentially nicer deity of the two between him and Tiamat, which is a total asshole, but–

SAM: Well that must be why Lady Kima came down here.

ORION: Right. So she must have camped here, put this symbol up for protection.

MATT: As you are having this discussion, you feel a slight rumble in the ground.

TRAVIS: Fucked up now.

MARISHA: Oh no.

MATT: Some of the rocks nearby, the loose pebbles, begin to vibrate and move around.

ORION: Oh dear.

SAM: Grog's probably farting again.

ORION: No, I don't think– I think we should alert the others.

SAM: All right.

LAURA: We're waking up, we're waking up. Don't worry, we are gonna heal you.

ORION: How far are we from everybody? We're just like–

MATT: You guys are all clustered in the small camp.

ORION: Oh.

SAM: Let's quietly wake them, and I will go peer into the darkness and see if I can see them.

ORION: Rumbling is never a good thing, Scanlan.

LAURA: Something's rumbling? I wasn't paying attention.

MATT: Do you still have your light source up, Light, or you just, the campfire?

ORION: Just the campfire.

MATT: Yeah, you are– outside of just, maybe 15, 20 feet, you see nothing. It's pitch black.

TALIESIN: Let's wake everybody up, and then we'll get to work–

LAURA: On healing Grog?

TALIESIN: – on Grog, and go see what that is.

LAURA: I'm not awake yet.

TALIESIN: Is all this going at the same time?

SAM: Is the rumbling continuous, or is it just one little rumble?

MATT: A few moments pass, the rumbling has subsided.

SAM: Oh, okay.

ORION: Oh, it stopped.

SAM: Oh, easy!

LAURA: So we're awake.

MARISHA: Okay, but let's–

LAURA: Let's heal this guy. Can you heal him?

MARISHA: Am I awake? Are we awake? Did you wake me up?

LAURA: Are we awake?

ORION: I do Prestidigitation and wake everybody up–

LAURA: (grunts) Awake.

ORION: – with a little spritz of water in the face.

MATT: Okay, all wake up–

ORION: Everybody get up!

SAM: Like the flower, the flower trick?

MARISHA: Why water? Why would you do that?

ORION: Yeah.

MARISHA: Why couldn't you just touch me?

TALIESIN: Magic bukkake.

ORION: Because it's–

LAURA: Ah, that was a good nap!

LIAM: Stupid lizard.

MARISHA: Ugh.

LAURA: I think Grog farted again.

ORION: I do it again, and clean everybody up.

MARISHA: Stop!

ORION: Sorry. sorry! It's off. I–

SAM: Something terrible is brewing.

LAURA: Keyleth– no, what?

SAM: How is everyone feeling? Do we need to heal? Everyone?

LAURA: We need to heal this guy.

SAM: No, what about us? How are we feeling?

LIAM: Well, we all just slept, so we're fine.

LAURA: We're fine! Heal this guy!

MARISHA: I'm okay.

SAM: Are we okay?

MATT: You've all slept for the evening–

ORION: Oh, awesome.

MATT: –and from the points of your unused–

LAURA: Grog, just wait a little bit longer.

MATT: – healing dice, you're pretty much all at max health, so.

LAURA: You'll be okay.

MARISHA: Okay, do we wanna stay here? Do we wanna do this here?

LAURA: Yeah! Do it here!

TALIESIN: Do this here.

ORION: There was a rumble. Okay, we need to get Grog, the others, and–

LAURA: How long will this take, Keyleth?

MARISHA: Tiberius– I don't know. But I want us to be as safe as we can. Tiberius, can you lift us up on your pillars, or like, encase us in, or something? Make us a room?

ORION: I was just about to do that!

MARISHA: Make us a room?

ORION: Yes!

MARISHA: Yes? Okay.

ORION: But everybody hates when I do that.

SAM: Are you gonna cast a spell now?

MARISHA: We're gonna do this.

SAM: Okay, I'd like to give her a little inspirational song.

MARISHA: Yes, if you could.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: Scanlan, give me some nice meditation, some–

SAM: Okay, some, like, yoga music?

MARISHA: Some, like, pure moods. Yes! Yes.

LAURA: Trinket gives her a massage beforehand to loosen her up.

MARISHA: I go ahead–

SAM: (sings) You know you got to cure Grog.

MARISHA: I go ahead and light some incense.

ORION: Wonderful tune.

MARISHA: Scanlan. Scanlan, do you still have that deity, that little idol of Pike?

SAM: I do have my idol of Pike, yes!

MARISHA: Can we just have that out just so I have her energy.

SAM: Oh, of course!

MARISHA: Just feel like I need her.

SAM: I take out the idol of Pike that I keep always close to my loins, and I hold it tightly, and warmly–

MARISHA: Okay.

SAM: – and caress it a little.

ORION: Give it to her.

MATT: It is momentarily distracting, but eventually you phase it out. All right, so as you guys–

(all laugh)

ORION: Did you want my hand or the statue?

MATT: You take a bit of earth from a pouch that you keep of your–

ORION: Statue.

MATT: – home tribe where you grew up. You scattered some of it around Grog, who is now laid on his back, whose arms and legs, all equally stretched out.

TRAVIS: Naked.

MATT: No. You're still clothed.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Let's not go there. No need to be naked.

LAURA: There's coffee next to you.

MATT: As this is the first time you've attempted a magic of this type, you close your eyes and take in the earth's essence. As a druid, being connected to nature is where you draw your divine energy. You kind of–

MARISHA: I'm so nervous.

MATT: – almost take from the vibration of the nearby caverns that you felt, and come in tune with the way the earth, the planet itself shifts and moves, you–

LIAM: You got this, Keyleth! You got this!

LAURA: You can do this Keyleth! You can do this!

MARISHA: I'm literally shaking.

MATT: You use that to give constitutional strength to the physical form of Grog in hopes of restoring him.

MARISHA: Okay, I just kind of lay my hands on his forehead.

LAURA: Oh my gosh!

SAM: You know, I know Grog very well, and he might enjoy, or be inspired by, a kiss of a female. I'm just saying, just the gentle kiss of a female lips on his might rouse him.

ORION: Ooh, Vex!

SAM: I've seen it many times.

ORION: You should plant one on him.

SAM: Vex? Get in there! Get in there!

(all laugh)

MATT: As Vex awkwardly fumbles over the–

LAURA: I think it helped.

MATT: – the overtly sized goliath-

LAURA: Stop it.

TRAVIS: Not all dead.

MATT: Go ahead and–

LIAM: Just upstairs.

MARISHA: Do I get an inspiration die from him or anything?

MATT: You do, yes.

MARISHA: Okay. What am I rolling? What do I do?

MATT: Roll a d20, add your wisdom modifier.

LAURA: Do I get to assist since I gave him a kiss?

MATT: No assistance on this. This only affects a d20 roll.

SAM: d20.

LAURA: Oh god.

TALIESIN: It's a wisdom modifier.

SAM: Let's do this, man.

LIAM: Save Grog!

LAURA: Save Grog. Save Grog!

SAM: For the chat room.

MARISHA: Gah. Nauseous. No.

MATT: What'd you roll? What'd you roll?

LAURA: No!

MARISHA: Where's the inspiration die? Where's the inspiration die?

ORION: Didn't you get advantage on that?

MARISHA: It's a d8, right?

MATT: It's a d8.

MARISHA: Do I get advantage on this, since I'm taking time?

LAURA: Yes!

MATT: As is, yes, yeah, you have advantage on the roll, yeah!

MARISHA: I do have advantage on this?

LAURA: Come on, Keyleth! Keyleth, Keyleth, Keyleth!

ORION: Yeah!

MARISHA: Oh, that's much better!

LAURA: What? What was it?

MARISHA: I'm still gonna do the inspiration dice, just in casies. Okay, that's good.

TALIESIN: That's good.

MARISHA: Okay, so.

MATT: What's the total?

MARISHA: 17 plus 12.

MATT: Plus 12?

MARISHA: Plus six, plus six with my wisdom modifier. My heart is pounding. So that's 30? No, 29.

MATT: 29, that should be enough.

TALIESIN: Oh my god.

MATT: So, (laughs), in this circumstance, you complete the ritual. There's a brief glow of all the–

MARISHA: Ah, I'm still shaking.

MATT: The dirt that you'd scattered around Grog, and you can see his form kind of take in a deeper breath. His chest expands, and as it does, his eyes, which currently stare off in space, begin to clarify and crystallize and his brow quivers for a second, and you see a little bit of life return to his face.

TRAVIS: Ugh. Kittens. Ugh. Nachos. Ugh.

SAM: (laughs)

MARISHA: Grog?

MATT: Grog, your sight focuses as the party is gathered around you, looking down upon your currently stretched out physical form in a cavern. You're very confused.

LIAM: Welcome back, big guy.

TRAVIS: I thought I was in algebra class again for a second there.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Grog!

SAM: You're alive!

ORION: Why are you all cheering?

LAURA: Good job, Keyleth!

ORION: Why did you run out and destroy nothing? Look what you did. You were giving me crap about the lightning. Don't ever do that again.

TRAVIS: Sorry, who woke me up from my sleep?

(electronic beep)

LAURA: Oh, Siri did, apparently.

ORION: It was a group effort really, but Keyleth did an amazing job.

TRAVIS: Keyleth? I run over and I give Keyleth a big ol' bear hug, squeezing maybe a bit too tight.

MARISHA: Ow.

LAURA: I think he shit himself while he was unconscious, so that's gotta smell really wonderful.

TRAVIS: I smell better than I ever have before.

MARISHA: Just glad you're all right, Grog. Really glad you're awake.

TRAVIS: I reach into the bag of holding and I get the cask of ale and my goblet, and I pour a little goblet of ale and I give it to Keyleth.

MARISHA: To Grog!

ALL: To Grog!

TRAVIS: To me!

(all laugh)

MATT: As a note too, just so you guys are aware, 20 is the stat cap for normal physical stats, however magical items can then bump that up higher. Just answering a chat room question.

LAURA: Right.

SAM: I don't even know what that means. Question or the answer.

MATT: That's okay. Don't worry about it.

SAM: Hey. How is he doing, how is he feeling?

TRAVIS: I'm so glad you had advantage on that.

SAM: Grog, how are you feeling?

ORION: Yes!

SAM: How is he feeling?

TRAVIS: My intelligence is–

What is it now?

MATT: It's back to normal.

MARISHA: At like the gym and you need some alcohol, after that.

TRAVIS: It's six, so–

SAM: Right where it should be.

TRAVIS: I feel right as rain. What are we killing?

(all laugh)

LIAM: Brains, apparently.

SAM: How many fingers is this?

TRAVIS: Three.

SAM: Perfect.

MARISHA: Good, he's back, you guys. He's back.

TRAVIS: Blue, oh no, hold on.

MARISHA: Good.

TRAVIS: Square!

ORION: I saunter over to Keyleth. That was mighty impressive.

MARISHA: Oh, thank you.

ORION: That was amazing.

MARISHA: I had Pike in mind. I channeled her energy.

SAM: It's true, it was quite astounding. I have a little chub on.

LAURA: (groans)

TRAVIS: (laughs) So do I, for some reason.

LAURA: You're welcome.

MARISHA: Yeah well, that's a bit of a side effect.

TRAVIS: It must be the morning.

MARISHA: That's part of the Greater Restoration, a few things get restored.

MATT: (laughs)

TRAVIS: God bless you.

LIAM: Do you remember anything about a kiss in your dreams while you were asleep?

TRAVIS: Well, my cheeks are sort of sore for some reason, as if they've been slapped repeatedly by a bunch of twats, and then I've got this one little wet mark right here where I got a kiss and it smells like half-elvish spit.

LIAM: Oh, that was Trinket. Trinket helped with the spell. Gave you a kiss and helped wake you up.

LAURA: Oh, why didn't I have Trinket–

TALIESIN: And several slaps.

MATT: At which point you look over and Trinket is there off to the side, notably excited that you're moving again.

(bear noises)

LAURA: Aw.

MATT: Comes over and nuzzles up against you for a moment.

TRAVIS: Oh Trinket, you big ol' furball. Trinket noogie.

LAURA: (laughs)

TRAVIS: Can we go kill something now?

LAURA: Well shit, I guess we should. I think we are all healed up.

MATT: You guys all healed overnight.

LAURA: Did he heal while he was unconscious?

MATT: You did not get an opportunity to use any of your stuff, so you're currently still at the hit points you were, plus you naturally healed just from the evening's rest.

TRAVIS: Oh, I did?

MATT: Four hit points.

SAM: Let's do some Grog healing. You don't have your healing dice, right?

TRAVIS: I do.

SAM: I'm gonna sing a song of rest for you, so that'll add 1d6 to your healing rolls.

TRAVIS: Yes! 11 plus– All right. 12. Great.

LAURA: How many d12s do you get to roll? You can roll four of them if you need to.

TRAVIS: (counts)

MATT: You can roll up to nine.

LAURA: You can roll up to nine dice.

TRAVIS: Oh!

MATT: Whatever your level is, that's how many dice you can use.

TRAVIS: Nipple tassels! That's way better.

(all laugh)

MATT: But that's for the day. Once you've used those nine hit dice to heal yourself naturally, you are maxed out outside of magical healing or potions.

TRAVIS: I've used two.

SAM: Shall we tarry on, everyone?

LIAM: Yes, I have a feeling these tunnels are going to suck majorly, but we have nowhere to go but down, so–

LAURA: So we know which tunnel she pointed towards?

MATT: She pointed towards the rest of the cavern, which you have just stepped into.

LAURA: Can I use tracking and see if I can not only see where the majority of tracks lead to, but see if I can spot the halfling Kima's tracks.

MATT: Lady Kima. Go ahead and make a survival check.

LAURA: Survival?

MATT: Which you have advantage on simply for tracking depending on what you're tracking.

LAURA: I do!

MATT: What are your favored enemies?

LAURA: My favored enemies are dragons and demons.

MATT: So you would not have advantage on this.

LAURA: Ah, screw that

MATT: That's okay. What did you roll?

LAURA: Oh, but I do. Wait. My favored terrain is the Underdark.

MATT: Okay. All right. For that, I will go ahead and give you advantage on that. This is technically considered the crust of the Underdark.

LAURA: That doesn't count if it rolls onto a phone?

LIAM: I think that's in this book.

MATT: Yeah, yeah, I think it's chapter four.

LAURA: 19 is what I rolled.

MATT: 19. Okay. As you guys begin to move, you can find, like, there is this waterfall. Which you can hear in the distance, there are a number of cascading, crashing water sounds. So you imagine there are multiple layers as this cavern descends down into the darkness. What are you using for a light source, by the way?

LIAM: Tiberius, yeah?

SAM: Tiberius, hit us.

ORION: What's happening?

SAM: Light

TRAVIS: Oh, ah.

(all laugh)

MATT: The cavern comes alive with bright white light.

TRAVIS: Oh, right. Sunglasses.

MATT: Using that, you take a while and you begin to just keep tabs on the surface area of this cavern as you begin to move further down. You find some portions where you can climb down to the lower levels. The first thing you notice is there are definitive signs of struggle or intense running towards the direction that you came from. Meaning things were seemingly either fleeing or heading that direction very quickly. Some of them appear to be more recent than others. You also begin to see a few partially decomposed corpses of various goblinoid creatures. You find two goblins just slain, just cut open, and off to the side you see some of the skin is pulled tight against the bone as a lot of it is just rotting from the cave itself. Not a very great smell. There have been small pockets of struggle the more you progress down this way. You also find some drag marks that are similar to what you saw back in the mines, and as you move forward and the light begins to open up, you can see small pockets of that red stone that's used to light a bunch of Kraghammer. You can start seeing elements of it embedded in the walls of the cavern ahead and just faintly giving this reddish glow and the outline of some shapes. You begin to step into the outskirts about 60 feet ahead of what looks like a series of huts, small stone structures cobbled together with small stone and stacked on each other. Simple driftwood and broken pieces of scavenged material put into small buildings. It's a very kinda ramshackle village underground.

SAM: Let's burn it down.

LIAM: I am stealthing. I roll stealth.

LAURA: Oh, okay, I'm gonna stealth too.

LIAM: Natural 20.

MARISHA: Woohoo!

LAURA: Natural 20. Oh, that really didn't count.

LIAM: Just roll on your phone a couple times and then off to the side.

LAURA: They all sucked, so.

LIAM: And you said that the red crystals on the wall are glowing somewhat?

MATT: Yeah, it's a certain amount of crystal that this mountain range seems to naturally produce that just inherently.

LIAM: Enough to give the half-elves vision in low light?

MATT: It seems such. At the point where you're close to it. Currently you have to use his light source to see much of anything. This village doesn't have any, but near the walls and the edges of the cavern you can see the gentle outline of this whole size of it. It's immense.

TALIESIN: Does it seem that there are signs of life?

MATT: From this view, you don't see any movement.

LIAM: I am starting to creep along the ground towards the nearest building and press up against the wall and see if I can– I'm just going to listen.

LAURA: I rolled a 16, is that enough to actually stealth?

MATT: That's up to you.

LAURA: No.

MARISHA: I'm going to let the twins stealth ahead.

MATT: You guys stealth ahead. The two of you follow each other, and you get to the outskirts, and you can now see in the center of this, a number of the buildings and huts have been smashed or destroyed. You can see more and more of these goblin corpses strewn across the ground. You can see some of these tents seem to have rags or something stuffed into one that's not too far ahead of you. There's two goblins near you, apparently slashed open. Similar wounds. It's just from the first glance stepping forward.

LIAM: None of them alive, that we can tell?

MATT: Nope.

LAURA: We can't see any movement anywhere?

MATT: Not from this perspective. You guys moved ahead and you barely have any light source of your own. You're having to deal with just the outskirts of his light spell.

LAURA: And none of that red light is lighting any of this?

MATT: Not in the center of the village. Those are only towards the outside walls of the cavern.

LIAM: So we're in the dark.

LAURA: Can I go up and see if I can get one of those little red rocks?

MATT: You can walk off to the side. So you take a few minutes to walk off to the very edge of the cavern. The rock is less of an actual stone that you can pull, more than it's a cluster of– almost like a vein of the stone in the actual wall. It would take a while for you to actually hack it out of the side. It can be done, but it will take you a while.

LAURA: Nah. I don't want to waste the time.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: What do you think, should I do it?

LIAM: No.

LAURA: Okay, cool.

TRAVIS: (laughs) No.

LIAM: But we're in pitch black here, and we can't really see what's going on. I think we need–

LAURA: A lantern.

LIAM: And Tiberius.

LAURA: (whispers) Tiberius.

LIAM: Wait, hold on. Tiberius, will you bring the party up?

ORION: Oh yes, of course, we'll be right there.

LAURA: Does anybody know– have we told anybody at home what that actually is?

MATT: Okay, so as you guys are aware, one of the magical items that was designed by Tiberius early in the campaign are essentially these gem enchanted earrings that activate as a Message spell between a few party members. He made a few of them.

LIAM: It was five total. Why don't we nail down who that is. It's the twins.

LAURA: We both have one.

LIAM: You.

ORION: You have one. He has one. She has one.

LIAM: He's pretty sneaky. All right.

SAM: And we can send and receive messages or just receive?

MATT: You're essentially whispering into each other's ears.

ORION: They're like walkie-talkies.

LAURA: It's like a walkie-talkie.

MATT: But it only works within a certain range.

SAM: Is it like a Madonna microphone?

MATT: A straight up with a big ol'–

ORION: I think it's like 500 feet.

MATT: 500 feet is the maximum length. So. You guys approach slowly, the light source opens up, and you see now a multitude of goblin bodies strewn about the open area of this village. You can see there are actually piles of corpses stuffed into some of these huts in the sides that aren't goblin. You can see what looks like a few small dwarven bodies piled up on the side. As you kinda glance over you look, some of them are partially eaten like they have been stripped for meat.

LAURA: Ew.

TRAVIS: What?

MATT: Make an investigation check.

LAURA: 24.

LIAM: 22.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: Check that building?

MATT: As you look through the building, there are piles of bone, sinew, and metal at this point. The dwarven bodies are mostly decomposed entirely, what remnants have not been stripped off it for food.

LIAM: Anything useful in the pile?

MATT: As far as what you guys can tell, you discover two things. One of the dwarves has a set of very very finely crafted leather armor.

LAURA: Ooh.

MATT: To pull it off the corpse is going to destroy it and going to be a not very interesting affair.

LAURA: Oh.

MATT: But it does look to have survived the horrible conditions under here. You also note specifically, Vex, that not the dwarven corpses, but a number of the goblin corpses you come across, some of them have a uniform wound. A number of these goblin corpses have this terrible puncture wound in the skull.

LAURA: Oh no.

MATT: In the forehead there. Just an opening wound about that big around.

LAURA: You didn't notice that, that's how unperceptive you are.

LIAM: My sister, everybody.

MATT: And for each one of these wounds– for as much flesh is on these goblins, there doesn't appear to be anything inside.

LAURA: It sucked their brains out. Whatever it was.

MATT: It's very possible.

TRAVIS: I know what that feels like.

ORION: Ooh, brain suckers.

TRAVIS: Are we with you?

LAURA: No, you're not, you're still hanging out–

SAM: We've come back.

TRAVIS: Did you put your finger in the hole?

LAURA: I'm going to put my finger in the hole.

ORION: I sauntered up 'cause–

SAM: You sauntered up.

ORION: You guys are sticking to the darkness?

MATT: Your finger goes inside, you reach around. There are elements of brain matter within there but even that has become very gelatinous.

TRAVIS: Oatmeal.

MATT: Partially decomposed in its own right, almost like a slime. But sure enough, the inside of the cranium itself is mostly vacant.

LAURA: Lovely. Trinket, no, he's not with us.

MATT: Trinket is back with the party.

MARISHA: So we can only assume that, what was his name?

SAM: Should we rejoin our fellows?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

LAURA: I guess it seems like it's safe enough, right? Around here right now?

TRAVIS: We come running up.

ORION: We do.

SAM: Traipsing, we traipse up.

TRAVIS: Skipping.

LAURA: As silently as possible, you come running up.

TRAVIS: (sings)

SAM: What's going on, guys?

LAURA: Brain suckers, something that sucks brains.

SAM: As long as they are sucking it out of goblins, I'm good with that.

LIAM: My sister doesn't remember, but one of our instructors in Syngorn used to tell us of a creature, I'm not sure what they're called, but–

LAURA: I don't think I was in that class, actually.

LIAM: Mm. A creature that steals its victims' minds and digests them, reaches right in and takes them out.

ORION: I'm assuming it's got to be a much smaller, mutated version of our brain-on-legs friend.

LIAM: I think it's much worse.

MARISHA: Yeah. Much worse.

LAURA: Much worse?

LIAM: Much worse.

ORION: Yeah.

LIAM: I think the brain was a scout or some sort of pet.

MARISHA: Well, we also have this K'varn, who is experimenting on all those creatures, so we can't even attest for any of this.

LAURA: Exactly.

ORION: That's true.

TRAVIS: I take a few steps back.

TALIESIN: It could just be parts of one.

MARISHA: Yeah, parts of one. It could be a hodge-podge of everything

TALIESIN: A dragon, goblin drained, brained–

LAURA: (gasps) What if K'varn is a dragon? What if– oh wait, I don't know anything about that. What was that symbol anyway, Tiberius?

ORION: That was a symbol of Bahamut, and it was a protection thing that I'm sure she put up to protect herself.

LAURA: Oh. So it was a good symbol?

ORION: It was, yes.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: You recall that Lady Kima was, specifically, a paladin of Bahamut.

LAURA: Oh! So she probably did that.

MARISHA: So she's been here.

MATT: That camp seems to have been hers while she was traipsing through the tunnels.

LAURA: I understand.

TALIESIN: Ah!

LIAM: I just think we should proceed with caution. Our teachers spoke about this thing, said that it was a being of the mind. I think our trouble with Grog could just be the beginning. We need to proceed very carefully.

LAURA: Oh no!

TRAVIS: I have two potions of fox's cunning. Could I drink one of those, since there's a giant brain-bitch wondering around the camp?

MARISHA: That's for your wisdom.

SAM: How long do they last?

LAURA: You could make yourself smarter?

TRAVIS: But it don't last very long.

MATT: Fox's cunning would give you benefit, I believe, to–

MARISHA: Intelligence.

MATT: I mean, essentially–

MARISHA: It would be Enhance Ability, essentially.

MATT: It would be Enhance Ability for wisdom, I'm

pretty sure.

MARISHA: I'll tell you. I think it's wisdom.

TRAVIS: Not intelligence?

MARISHA: No, no, no, it's intelligence.

MATT: It's intelligence? Okay, there you go.

MARISHA: Because I think it's like owl's wisdom for wisdom.

MATT: Right, no, you're correct. So essentially it would be an Enhance Ability for intelligence, yes.

LAURA: How long does it last?

MATT: Oh, for the potion's effect? That would be anywhere from four to eight hours, you're not quite sure.

LAURA: Maybe you should wait until we come across something.

TRAVIS: All right, but if it's too late–

MARISHA: Yeah, you have advantage on intelligence checks.

TRAVIS: Intelligence checks? All right.

LIAM: Just don't go running off into the dark again.

LAURA: Yeah, let us lead the way, or whoever's smart. I'm really smart, how smart are you?

LIAM: Not smart enough, apparently.

MARISHA: So it wouldn't necessarily–

TRAVIS: It wouldn't make my intelligence higher?

MARISHA: It wouldn't make your intelligence higher, and it wouldn't necessarily help with your vulnerability.

TRAVIS: All right, never mind.

LIAM: He's smart.

LAURA: Who's our smartest person? Who has the highest intelligence here?

LIAM: What are these scores you keep talking about? I don't know what anybody's talking about.

ORION: It's okay, Vax. I don't know what a lot of people are talking about all of the time.

TALIESIN: IRL?

TRAVIS: Yeah, whoever's the smartest should be in the front.

LAURA: That's true.

TALIESIN: I'm sitting at 16.

TRAVIS: 14.

LIAM: 16.

LAURA: 16.

MARISHA: Well it's about, like, having high– it's not necessarily being smart, it's about having resistance to willpower.

LAURA: But if they take you down– if they take down your intelligence, then whoever has higher intelligence–

MARISHA: Right.

SAM: No one's going to take down our intelligence, we're too strong and we're too awesome.

LAURA: I don't want another catatonic– all right.

ORION: And we know what we're going into.

LAURA: All right!

MARISHA: Well, we sort of know what we're going into.

TRAVIS: Does that mean we get to run into a fight?

LAURA: Oh no, this music sounds very fighty.

MARISHA: Hang on.

SAM: Or festive.

LAURA: Oh no!

MARISHA: Okay, so here's my question.

LIAM: Yeah.

MARISHA: So we've already fought two things where we can't look at them and they mess with our heads.

TRAVIS: Right.

LAURA: Yes.

MARISHA: So is there something we can do going forward–

LAURA: To like boost our willpower or something?

MARISHA: Or like–

TALIESIN: You want Magneto's helmet? What you want is Magneto's helmet.

MARISHA: I like Magneto's helmet! Or even if we–

TALIESIN: I haven't built Magneto's helmet.

MARISHA: Do we have a bunch of mirrors? Or where we can look through things with reflections.

LAURA: (gasps) I gave you some mirrors! Do you remember?

LIAM: I have mirrors.

TRAVIS: We do have a big dressing mirror.

LIAM: But that's more for–

LAURA: For looking around corners?

LIAM: I don't know if that's going to help.

LAURA: It could help!

ORION: I could make a mirror.

LIAM: Yes, I have them, of course. I always, I always have them, they were a gift.

TRAVIS: We have one mirror in the bag of holding.

LAURA: That's good!

ORION: With like an ice-type of thing–

LAURA: We could put a mirror–

MARISHA: Kind of like a Medusa's gaze thing. You know, where you like look in the reflection.

LIAM: But that's a Gorgon. That's talking about the gaze–

MARISHA: Right.

LIAM: We're talking about the mind, I think.

LAURA: Right.

MARISHA: Yeah.

SAM: I have a whip! And a forgery kit.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: It would just be about making us less vulnerable to the mind–

LIAM: Could you forge some professor hats for us all?

(all laugh)

LAURA: So what, our option is to keep moving forward, then?

SAM: Yes, just be cautious, that's all we can do.

LIAM and TALIESIN: That's all we can do.

LAURA: All right.

TRAVIS: We move forward.

SAM: What do you want to do, you want go back?

LAURA: As quietly as possible, to keep moving forward.

TALIESIN: It's difficult to prepare for what we're not prepared for.

LAURA: And on the lookout for anything in this ramshackle town.

MARISHA: That's true.

TALIESIN: Sorry.

MARISHA: I mean, I can cast Enhance Ability to help our willpower? Or our will.

MATT: So you leave behind the pile of dwarven corpses, you leave behind the goblin corpses with the wounds and start seeing more of a pattern.

LIAM: And if I may, I suggest Tiberius, you work your Light spell, and Vex'ahlia and I scout ahead about 60 or 70 feet, so that we can see in the dim light, catch anything coming, using your magic.

LAURA: Yes.

TRAVIS: And I light up the hooded lantern we have in the bag of holding.

MATT: Okay. So you put the hood on and light that up, very good. Leaving the leather armor behind?

LAURA: Oh well, I thought you said it would get ruined if we took it?

LIAM: And it was dwarf-sized.

MATT: No, it would be nasty pulling it off a corpse.

LAURA: Oh, well then, fuck it, let's pull it off.

LIAM: Isn't it dwarf-sized? Or is armor also shrink and expand?

LAURA: It's magical. Possibly.

MATT: It's dwarf-sized.

LIAM: Magical.

ORION: It's fine. I cast Prestidigitation and clean it all up.

LAURA: I take it.

MATT: Okay, so you shake off the element–

LAURA: All the goo.

MATT: – the remaining elements of the dwarven corpse. Just falls off out of the armor. You have to kind of shake it and eventually all of it escapes–

LAURA: Yes. Thank you!

TALIESIN: Dwarven corpse.

LIAM: It's like pulled pork.

LAURA: Mm.

MATT: Make an arcana check. It does have a magical aura.

LAURA: (gasps) What is it?

ORION: Nice. 20.

MATT: All right. It appears to be a simple but powerful enchantment. It is a pair of studded leather armor with a plus two enchantment.

LAURA: Plus two enchantment to what?

SAM: Plus two enchantment?

MATT: To your AC.

LIAM: If I try to pull on the sleeve, does it come up to my elbow or does it stretch out and fit?

MATT: It comes up to your elbow and then, given a moment, it fits to your form.

LAURA: Ooh, yeah!

LIAM: That's nice.

LAURA: Go take that studded leather armor, brother!

LIAM: I'll take this, hold on. Thank you. I go into the smelly corpse hut and start to change my armor.

LAURA: What did you get? Let me see that.

SAM: So wait, does he get a bigger or higher AC? What is that?

MATT: Yes, it is considered– it works as studded leather armor, but that gives him a plus two bonus to his armor class on top of that.

SAM: Wow, that's huge!

LAURA: Yeah, so he just took it.

SAM: I'll take it.

LAURA: He already took it.

MARISHA: Hey, dungeon master? Asking as the dungeon master.

MATT: Yes?

MARISHA: If I cast Owl's Wisdom on people, it gives people advantage on wisdom checks. Would that count on saving throws against willpower?

MATT: No.

LAURA: Damn it!

MATT: Not checks, specifically.

MARISHA: Would it help anything?

MATT: I mean–

MARISHA: Would, would any advantage to wisdom under Enhance Ability help some?

MATT: Let me double-check it.

SAM: I'll give you all dice before we go in.

LAURA: Some of these– I remember we rolled charisma saving throws, though, for the umbers. They were charisma.

MARISHA: Right. And for the brains it was versus willpower.

SAM: While the DM looks this up, everyone, subscribe to the Geek and Sundry twitch channel! Support the show, support the channel.

MARISHA: Yeah! And don't forget about our charity, 826LA, which helps children be literate and write stories well.

ORION: It makes them smarter in the head.

SAM: And keep sending us food.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: We like food.

SAM: And more presents.

LIAM: If you want a thousand years–

ZAC: There's more food on the way, so don't ask them for more.

MARISHA: What?

ORION: Oh, no!

TRAVIS: No food!

TALIESIN and SAM: No more food.

MATT: Yeah, we have enough food, guys, thank you.

LIAM: If you want a thousand years of D&D, we've got to pay the overheads, so please, subscribe!

ORION: It's true!

MATT: So yeah, unfortunately it helps ability checks, those are not considered saving throws.

LAURA: All right.

MARISHA: I don't know if I have anything.

TALIESIN: We'll be all right, we'll be all right.

ORION: As we start to walk, I cast Stoneskin on myself.

MATT: You cast Stoneskin on yourself? All right, Stoneskin's on you, Tiberius.

LIAM: Once you've got the dwarf gunk off, it's rather nice.

LAURA: Oh yeah?

LIAM: Yes, it's supple.

SAM: All right, shall we keep on keeping on?

TALIESIN: Let's go.

LAURA: Let's go, let's keep on moving!

MARISHA: Let's get it done.

ORION: (sings) Keep on keeping on.

MATT: You guys keep pushing forward.

ORION: Is that what we're going to do?

LAURA: All right.

MATT: All right, as you begin to press through the goblin ghost town–

TRAVIS: We've got to get it closer than that.

LAURA: I'm still tracking, looking for anything interesting.

MATT: Which you do, you catch, off in the distance, another faint moving light source.

LAURA: Oh shit! Hey, everybody, calm down.

SAM: Huh?

LAURA: Sh! There's something moving in the distance.

MATT: Everyone roll a stealth check.

TRAVIS: Stealth check?

MATT: Yes.

LAURA: Oh god, roll a stealth check. (gasps) Natural 20!

MATT and LIAM: Nice!

LIAM: 30.

MARISHA: 15.

ORION: 11.

SAM: 20.

TALIESIN: 12.

TRAVIS: (softly) Six.

MATT: Okay, as you all buckle down and be as quiet as you can–

LAURA: You rolled a six? He rolled a six.

MATT: You begin to see–

SAM: (whispers) Grog rolled a six.

LIAM: (whispers) Stay put, you asshole.

MATT: No, noted, that's okay, that's okay. It's a group check, in which case people offset each other's difficulty.

TRAVIS: Yay, bell curve.

MATT: So you seem to be comfortable in the stillness of the moment. Best you can see in the distance, you see figures shifting, moving away from you.

LAURA: (whispers) Sh, figures!

MATT: Many figures. A fairly large group of seeming to be humanoid figures, moving steadily away from you.

LAURA: Can we scout ahead? We're both really super stealth, can we like–

LIAM: Yeah, we're gonna start kinda quickly dash after them.

MATT: Yeah, using your same stealth rolls, you push forward.

TRAVIS: Humanoid figures, you say?

LIAM: Could mean anything.

MATT: Yes, best you could tell. As you guys start reaching the outskirts of the opposite side of this small, goblin village that has been completely sundered, you see a cliff, but a large cliff. The actual surface here comes to a very direct end and seems to just disappear into a dark abyss. There is a singular, ten-foot-wide rope bridge, that is bolted into the side of this cliff and stretches out across this giant crevasse, for what– you can't see the other side.

TRAVIS: Awesome!

LAURA: This feels like The Descent, I don't like this, you guys.

MATT: It very much has that kind of a feel. It just goes on a for a good 60, 70 feet, and then darkness. And you can see what looks to be a cluster of about 12 to 13 duergar–

LAURA: (whispers) Oh no.

MATT: – making their way in lines of two across this bridge. Amongst them, they have, chained up, three dwarf miners that they are also dragging across the bridge.

SAM: We have to save those ones.

TRAVIS: Just cut the bridge

SAM: No, no!

LAURA: What do the miners look like? Are they– are they docile, or are they– do they seem to be fighting back?

MATT: They don't appear to put up much of a fight in their current circumstance.

LIAM: How wide is the bridge?

MATT: Ten feet.

LIAM: Ten feet? That means two people wide.

LAURA: Grog goes by himself. Yes.

LIAM: But if we go out there, it's going to be close combat.

TRAVIS: (whispers) We have a flying carpet.

LIAM: You can't get to the ones at the back.

LAURA: I mean how many are there? Like ten or so?

LIAM: 12. 12 I count.

MATT: From what you can see it looks about 12-ish

LAURA: And they have a light source with them so we can definitely see them?

MATT: They do, it's a very faint light. It's like a small cluster of the red stone that's been mined and put into a spherical element and is hanging from a chain like a lantern.

LAURA: We have two options. We can fight them.

LIAM: We could fight now.

LAURA: Or follow them.

TRAVIS: Follow.

LAURA: I think we follow them.

MARISHA: Do I see any– are there any bats?

MATT: Make a perception check.

SAM: If we follow them on the bridge, won't they feel it bouncing?

MARISHA: I failed.

LAURA: We gotta wait 'til they cross it, Scanlan.

SAM: We can't see the end of it.

LIAM: I grab my ear and, Keyleth, I heard you through Tiberius' earring, why don't you just become a bat and follow along?

LAURA: She's trying to do that.

MARISHA: I was gonna see if they're in the–

LIAM: You've never seen a bat in the woods?

MATT: Best you can tell, and from your knowledge of bats and their existence, they generally live in caverns that have readily available openings to the outside world, where they do their nocturnal hunting. This is a very, very deep cavern that does not have easy access to the surface. Bats are probably not a good chance in this cavern.

LAURA: I've got an idea. I run back to Grog, stealthed. I get our flying carpet.

MATT: A hand suddenly mysteriously reaches into the bag.

TRAVIS: (sputters)

LAURA: Gimme the carpet.

TRAVIS: What?

LAURA: The carpet. Gimme the carpet.

SAM: Just you? You're gonna go on the carpet alone?

LAURA: And him. we can both go on the carpet.

SAM: What if something happens?

LAURA: We just gotta see where they're going! We'll come back and get you.

SAM: I'm coming with you.

LAURA: All right, Scanlan.

TRAVIS: I give them her carpet, but I also tie the endless rope thread around.

LAURA: Oh yeah. Okay, so we have an endless rope with us.

LIAM: Now we're a kite.

MATT: You pull out the carpet and lay it out. At this point in time, they're a little over halfway across the bridge.

LAURA: Okay, so we–

MATT: Which, you can see it swaying in a very uncomfortable way.

LAURA: Scanlan, you better be stealthed.

MATT: You hear the stretching of ropes.

LAURA: Oh, you can hear the rope?

MATT: As you hear the rope just tense as the bridge is slowly swaying. So you guys lay out the carpet. The two of you get on?

LAURA and LIAM: And Scanlan.

LIAM: I grab Scanlan by the scruff of his neck.

MATT: The three of you guys hop on, and it's probably big enough for the three of you. It's about the right size.

SAM: Shotgun.

MATT: The carpet begins to lift off, and you kind of will it towards– Are you going straight over the bridge or are you taking a side route?

LAURA: We're going next to the bridge.

LIAM: Side and up. 'Cause they can look sideways.

LAURA: I think we should go down below the bridge.

LIAM: If you're on a bridge, you're looking down at your feet.

SAM: Let's go above them.

LAURA: All right, fine, fuck it, go above them.

MATT: Okay so you guys, you take up over. First off, the three of you guys make a stealth check.

LAURA: I thought we were still stealthed?

MATT: Maneuvering on a flying carpet is a different type of locomotion.

TALIESIN: We have a flying carpet, by the way. That's a thing.

SAM: Not great. 13.

LIAM: 29.

LAURA: 17.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: Were you guys trying to stealth? Is that what happened?

MATT: So, as soon as you reach the edge of the crevasse, immediately the air itself is warmer. And there's actually a bit of a strange breeze blowing up from underneath this giant crevasse. And you look down and you can see, faintly, light sources. Long, thin, trickling streams of what looks like molten rock.

TRAVIS: Shit.

SAM: Way down below.

MATT: Way down below.

TRAVIS: That's a ways.

MATT: It's at least a thousand feet down.

SAM: We don't want to fall.

MATT: Don't fall, it's very bad. The air itself has a very sulfurous smell. There's a lot of various strange chemical scents that's a bit pungent to the nose. There's a lot of chemical reactions that are causing this atmosphere. It's a little difficult to take any air at first. You have to get adjusted. It is a very, very deep cavern below. When you look behind, you can see the river that's been cascading through this cavern goes rocketing off the edge and disappears into the darkness below. Are you keeping your distance or–

LAURA: Keeping a good distance.

LIAM: Distance, because they have a light source, so we want to follow that.

LAURA: Yeah, so we need to stay kind of out of it but see it.

MATT: Okay. You guys push forward, keeping at a safe distance. You eventually follow them across the crevasse, and you can see now them entering what looks like a shanty town of tents and small stone structures. Better built than the goblin village that was previously there, but it looks almost like a temporary or pseudo-temporary series of homes for the duergar in this section. There's a bunch of military tents and cloth pup tents put up in sections. You can see some easy-to-construct one- or two-day constructions of stone buildings. Very square, very rigid and dwarven in their design, more for utility that any sort of visual presentation or beauty.

LIAM: This is a temporary war camp.

LAURA: It is.

MATT: There are also a series of these-

LIAM: Yes!

MATT: – of these redstone–

LAURA: Good dialogue!

MATT: Yeah, it's legit guys. A series of these redstone torches that they were holding, or these lanterns, are hung up all throughout the village on these giant poles that have been placed in areas to give a little bit of an occasional light source throughout this entire camp.

LAURA: About how many people does it look like– I mean, how big is this camp?

MATT: How big, the camp?

LIAM: How many buildings?

MATT: At a first glance, you can only check out elements of it from your distance, you're only making out shapes from how far back you guys are without actually getting inside. You gather you've probably seen throughout, just this portion that you've come into, anywhere from 30 to 40 duergar moving through, as well as a few larger shapes.

LAURA: (whispers) Oh, shit.

MATT: You swear you catch one or two other very large humanoid hulking figures just

(thudding noises)

LAURA: Oh no.

MATT: Stepping through the camp.

LIAM: How are we gonna get through this?

LAURA: How are we– what are we gonna do? What are we gonna do?

SAM: The view up here is beautiful!

LAURA: (sings) A whole new world.

MARISHA: (whispers) Hey, hey, what do you guys see?

ORION: Scanlan, what's going on?

LAURA: (whispers) Okay, so–

SAM: Is the range? How are–

MATT: The range is getting a little broken, you can hear–

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: The words are coming through but–

MARISHA: You're cutting out. I can't hear you

LAURA: Okay.

LIAM: I think–

LAURA: Well, one of us.

SAM: We'll update you soon.

LAURA: Well, one of us. Let's put down.

LIAM: Put down?

TRAVIS: In the volcano?

LAURA: No no no, how are we, like–

TRAVIS: Just go straight down.

LAURA: At a place where we can land the carpet and stand around.

SAM: They'll probably see us.

LAURA: Or should we go back?

LIAM: We're past the chasm at this point or still afloat?

MATT: You've just now crested–

LIAM: The other side.

MATT: The crevasse the other side. And you're feeling uncomfortable pushing further forward because you're now starting to get a lot more eyes in your vicinity.

LAURA: Okay, are there any– does it look like– do we see any cavern openings in the vicinity? Does it look like there's any?

MATT: Looking around, there are no side caverns, this is actually a pretty smooth cavern that kind of circles around where this camp is built, there is one large tunnel entrance on the opposite side that continues past.

LAURA: But they're blocking it? Or–

MATT: You can't see anything beyond the fact that the tunnel– the walls kind of convene. You can see a little bit of a tunnel opening and just darkness beyond that.

LIAM: So, bridge to land, and then a tunnel.

MATT: A tunnel on the other side, and where the land starts there's a giant portion of the cavern that continues and then closes off, kind of pinches, to the entrance to where the camp is.

LAURA: How far away is the camp from that?

MATT: The camp is completely filling this side of the cross. It's blocking pretty much the whole.

LAURA: Oh, so we can't get to that.

MATT: Not without going through or over the city.

LAURA: What about–

LIAM: So it's bridge, town, tunnel.

SAM: Tunnel.

MATT: Correct.

LAURA: Do we see any closer– Under the bridge, are there any openings underneath the bridge that look like–

MATT: Do you want to swoop down and check?

LIAM: Yes.

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: Okay, you swoop down and–

LIAM: (whoosh)

MATT: –the rock there–

LAURA: (whoosh)

MATT: (whoosh) – the warm air is still kinda bothering you in general.

LIAM: (makes farting noise)

LAURA: Excuse me.

MATT: You find yourself kinda taking your cloak and putting it over your mouth just to get the scent out. The side of the rock surface is worn through what looks like maybe a possible river that also came from the other side that has since dried out, so you can see there is, while no water on this side of the crevasse, a lot of the stone has been smoothed just through rapid water running for thousands of years possibly. But there are no visible openings or other additional caverns on this rock surface

LAURA: What are we gonna do?

TRAVIS: (whispers) Are they still on–

SAM: Okay, listen. Leave me behind, I'll follow the party with the hostages, I'll see where they go. Don't worry, I'll be invisible. Go back, tell our fellows, get them across the bridge, and we'll meet here in about an hour.

MARISHA: Okay.

LAURA: Scanlan!

TRAVIS: I like it.

SAM: What? I'm super brave and hung, come on, let's do this.

(all laugh)

LAURA: All right, I'm down. Should we do it?

LIAM: All right.

LAURA: We drop him off.

SAM: I turn invisible.

TRAVIS: (sings) Scanlan, the best bard.

SAM: And I'm gonna just hang behind the party that's got the hostage dwarves, and just kinda see where they go.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Should one of us protect him?

TRAVIS: Do you activate hung at the same time?

SAM: Don't have to activate.

LIAM: He's invisible, though.

TRAVIS: Okay.

LAURA: I mean, we can't go invisible, we can't be as like–

LIAM: No.

SAM: It's passive.

MARISHA: It's a racial bonus.

LAURA: He's sneaky, we can't be as invisible as him. All right.

SAM: Yeah but I might make– I might snap twigs.

LIAM: Last question. Where are the people, the figures we were following?

Did they finish the bridge at this point?

MATT: They're long past the bridge, they're inside the city proper at this point.

LAURA: Okay.

LIAM: Okay, so then I'll stay by the edge of the bridge, you go back. Scanlan, go ahead, I'll wait for you here, if there's trouble.

SAM: Ding-a-ling-a-ling!

LIAM: Yes.

SAM: Got it.

LAURA: All right.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: I go back, thanks.

LIAM: Shit.

LAURA: Thanks for sending me back. I go back.

LIAM: Go get the others.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: Okay.

MATT: Scanlan. As you go ahead, make your way in towards the city, go ahead and make a stealth check with advantage.

TRAVIS: C'mon, buddy.

SAM: 16. 18!

MATT: 18, okay. You push, kind of falling behind the main group, and they're heading towards this kind of, more or less a loose thoroughfare in the center of this town. You can see a few duergar coming out and kind of inspecting as they enter, speaking in a language you don't understand, asking questions, some of them are coming out and slapping the dwarf captives as they go across, or spitting on them. The dwarves look very broken and unhappy with the circumstance, but brimming with anger. You see a couple of them are, like true dwarves, they haven't given in to it, they're just looking for an option or a moment to get some vengeance. They're stripped of all armor and weaponry. They're brought through some of the alleys and paths between these pup tents and these stone structures. You can see, there are some of the hulking figures, there are two trolls wandering amongst these duergar.

TRAVIS: Yes! (whispers) Trolls!

MATT: Now, you've encountered trolls before, but these trolls–

LAURA: (gasps) Yeah we have.

MATT: – also have a similar, pupil-less, clouded over, white-eye appearance–

SAM: Ooh! They're slave trolls!

MATT: As you begin to follow them further in, you manage to see two ogres that are currently stationed across this main open center location in this campsite. And both of these ogres also have the same, pupil-less, white, glazed-over look to their eyes. And they're both just kind of glancing about. The rest of the duergar are in the process of constructing other tents. Some of them look like they're actually in the process of forging weaponry. It feels like it's a war camp. It's definitely preparing for something. However, in the center of this main area, you do see, there is a wooden platform, about 20 foot by 20 foot, that is raised up, and you see a group of about six duergar that are all wearing very intricate, black iron plate armor. And they're all just sitting on the outskirts of this platform.

SAM: White eyes?

MATT: All the duergar seem to have that natural look to their eyes as well.

TRAVIS: Shit.

SAM: Okay.

MATT: As the party you've been following enters the center of this vicinity, make another stealth check, with advantage.

SAM: Gah. 19.

MATT: All right. You kind of step off to the side, a duergar steps out of one of the tents near you, and you just barely manage to pull out of the way without making any sort of squeak or noise. He goes by. (sniffs)

TRAVIS: Oh god!

LAURA: Oh god!

LIAM: Careful, Bilbo!

MATT: And begins stepping out, looking intently for something, but right past you, by inches, as he walks past. You look over again, to the camp, and you can now see, toward the very back end of this open midsection, by this platform, there is one large, stone construct. It looks like a makeshift barracks has been placed there, with double stone doors that are currently opened, and you can see two figures stepping out of the stairs that lead into these barracks, heading towards the main platform. They step up onto the platform. One of which is a very, very well-decorated duergar, who's wearing similar blackened plate armor as the other kind of elite guard that you saw surrounding this platform, but with gold and silver scrolling on it, a long, tattered, dark, dark purple cape, and has a nasty scar across the cheek that leads into this kind of gnarled, grey beard. As it steps forward, you can see, sheathed off to its back in a large scabbard, a gargantuan– for a dwarf especially– two-handed sword that should be unwieldy for a creature of its size. But nevertheless looks dangerous and a creature next to it is–

LAURA: (whispers) We can't fight these guys.

MATT: – not so small, not dwarven. Actually, very tall, lanky, long, black and purple robes, a hood, obscuring its features, stepping roughly two feet behind it as they both step on to the platform to address the rest of the guard and the approaching party of duergar dwarves you've been following. You can see some conversation happening, but you're too far away to really make out anything that's being said, do you want to move closer?

SAM: Do I speak their language?

MATT: Do you speak Undercommon?

SAM: Nope!

MATT: Then you– it all sounds gibberish to you!

SAM: Then, no thank you. (laughs)

MATT: Okay. But you see some conversation happening. This seemingly officious duergar, this general that steps out and commands the attention in the room, makes a few gestures, shouts out to amongst the other nearby. Not quite sure, but you get the idea he's giving orders or directions. The war party then begins to pull the slaves back away, and–

SAM: The captives? Okay.

MATT: The captives. Begins pulling them away toward another section on the side. As it does, the tall, lanky figure, which you now get the sense that it's not really walking. It's just kind of drifting–

SAM: (apprehensive sound)

MATT: – holds its hand out. This long, long finger and lanky hand, and as it does, every single duergar in the vicinity, whatever it was doing, stops in place, and all turn and look at it, as one.

SAM: Whoa.

MATT: At which point, this creature brings its fingers in a beckoning gesture, loosely in your direction.

SAM: I'm wearing my ring of mind-shielding, by the way.

MATT: For a split second, you feel your heart at your throat, and the entire back of your body stands on pins and needles as one of the duergar carrying one of the captives begins to pull one of the dwarven captives back towards the platform. As it does, the dwarf, who is giving kind of a fight and looks nervous, looks over at the figure and its arms go limp to its side, and it begins to walk out of its own volition, taking two, three steps. Steps onto the platform and approaches this tall, lanky figure with the hood and long robes behind it. As it does, its hand reaches out and caresses the side of this dwarf's face. This dwarf seems to have given up all sense of fight or any sort of conflict and just stares up into this darkened hood. As the tall, lanky creature reaches out with both hands and pulls the dwarf forward, you see these terrible purple tentacles come writhing out of the front of the hood, wrapping around the head of the dwarf, pulling it into it. As the hood falls back, you see this horrible smooth, purplish-blue hairless head, these sunken yellowish-green eyes as the tentacles wrap around the dwarf's head and pulls it into its mouth. There's a brief struggle, and then the dwarf's arms fall limp to its side. At which point, the tentacles unravel from its head, the creature pulls back, a bit of ichor and dwarf blood dripping from what looks like a lamprey's toothy maw, and then thrusts the body to the ground, with a thud as it falls lifeless to the ground.

SAM: Poor son of a bitch.

MATT: A horrible, bored hole in its forehead. The creature then draws its hood back up, releases its hand in a cursory fashion, and all the duergar whip back around and continue the motions they were previously going towards. As the two dwarven captives that now remain look completely stunned, their faces white with fear as they are being dragged off in this state. The tall, lanky figure gives a nod to the duergar general, who gives a nod as well, then to turn around and walk back.

LAURA: Oh god.

SAM: Worst show ever. Okay. That was one of the captives. Do I see where the other captives were taken?

MATT: The two other captives, you follow them? They both are pulled to– essentially to a western side. If you look overhead, this is where the barrack building is, this is where you entered and this is the main area. They are pulled off to the western side here. They are taken to a large tent. As they are pulled in, they close it behind them. You can hear some muffles and some growling from the inside of the tent.

SAM: Okay. I assume bad things are happening in there, I don't need to see it, right? I think I'll just kind of– is there anything–

MATT: Do you speak Dwarven?

SAM: No, oh, no, do I? What do I speak? Where does it say? Shit.

MATT: Should be on the lower left-hand of your player sheet.

LAURA: Did you choose languages?

SAM: I play a shawm. No, I just speak Common and Gnome.

MATT: You hear what sounds like guttural Dwarvish being shouted angrily, cursing from the interior, and a few other dwarven voices also joining in– more than two. You hear some horrible, sick thuds and some impacts and some cries of pain. And eventually, the five duergar dragging the captives walk out, carrying cudgels at their side, still dripping with fresh blood. They kind of go amongst their own business from there.

SAM: Okay. I think I'll go back to my fellows. There's nothing I can see– that door doesn't lock– does it lock by any chance?

MATT: It's just an opening tent.

SAM: Open tent. There's nothing lying around, none of that black armor lying around or anything? Any extra things –

MATT: Not on the street.

SAM: Okay, I think I will just make back for my friends, then.

MATT: Okay, make a stealth check.

LAURA: Oh, god.

SAM: With advantage?

MATT: With advantage.

(all laugh)

SAM: 21.

MATT: You maneuver your way out back the way you came, best you can, remembering– you get disoriented in general trying to find your way out. Go ahead and make a survival check.

LAURA: Oh no!

SAM: Survival check, so plus zero. 17.

MATT: 17.

LAURA: That's a good roll, yo.

MATT: Okay, you take a moment, orient yourself, looking about the cavern. This is a very confusing network, and the passages you've gone– you paid more attention to what's happening–

SAM: It's like Venice.

MATT: Kind of, yeah. You nearly get lost twice, but eventually find your way back to the southern-portion entrance of this war camp. You can just see the crevasse and you start getting the familiar scent of that sulfurous wind that was billowing out from underneath. You step out a few more feet, and you can see the edge of the bridge where the rest of you have finally come to converge on the other side of the crevasse.

LAURA: Ooh!

SAM: Whoa. I am going to tell you everything that just happened, in detail, in real time.

(all laugh)

LAURA: Maybe he can tell us while we are taking a bathroom break?

MATT: You know what, let's go ahead and take this moment to have a bathroom break, guys, as sort of the halfway mark.

MARISHA: Holy shit.

MATT: We will continue this in just a moment. In the meantime, take a rest, take ten or 11 minutes. We are going to play our character backgrounds for those who haven't seen it. We will be back here in about ten minutes, guys.

MARISHA: What are we going to do?

TRAVIS: We are gonna fight the shit out of them.

LIAM: We're going to risk it all.
Break

[break]

[no audio]
Part II

MATT: – for her as well, so look forward to that some point in the near future. As we left off, the party had just reconvened on the other side of this gargantuan crevasse in the Underdark, after Scanlan had stealthed into the duergar war camp, witnessed a number of dwarven captives being taken somewhere, however, one of which was devoured by some strange creature. Left brainless and dead on the platform in the center, outside of a giant barracks-type building. You reconvened and expressed all of this information to the party.

SAM: And that's when I came back to see you guys.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Great.

TALIESIN: Wonderfully detailed.

LAURA: What are we going to do?

MARISHA: I give Scanlan some water from my waterskin.

LIAM: You are a brave little fellow.

SAM: Thank you.

LAURA: Has anyone come across these creatures before? These weird tentacle brain guys?

MARISHA: I've heard rumors of those. Can we make a check for those?

ORION: It sounds like it would be a mind flayer, of sorts.

LAURA: A mind flayer?

ORION: A mind flayer or mind slayer, I'm not too sure.

SAM: What is that?

ORION: I'm pretty sure it flays your mind. I'm never encountered one myself, so I have no idea, really. Oh, right, let me check my books.

MATT: Intelligence.

ORION: 14.

MATT: You probably call it a mind flayer.

ORION: It says right here, mind flayer. The rest is all inked up. I got water on it.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: How big was this mind flayer, was he like 20 feet tall, Scanlan?

SAM: He was tall, I mean everyone looks 20 feet tall to me, I'm a gnome.

TRAVIS: Was he bigger than me?

SAM: He was bigger than you by a little?

MATT: No, roughly a little shorter than him. But taller than most.

SAM: He carried himself big. He was lanky.

TRAVIS: Let's go fuck him up.

LAURA: No, Grog!

TRAVIS: What?

LAURA: Do you want to be unconscious again? We have to be careful here.

TRAVIS: It was rather restful.

LAURA: How many dwarves did it sound like there were locked in that prison cell?

SAM: Several?

MARISHA: Did you see Lady Kima?

SAM: No sign of Lady Kima at all, just a bunch of dwarves being held against their will, and then one by one being brain sucked by Mr. Lanky Man.

TRAVIS: And those two big trolls.

ORION: Percy, could you take a look at this?

SAM: Two big trolls, and ogres, don't forget ogres, there's ogres too.

TRAVIS: There are ogres?

SAM: Yes, there were two big ogres as well. And duergar aplenty–maybe four dozen or so, three dozen?

LIAM: Spread throughout the city, throughout this little camp, Scanlan.

SAM: Wandering. Yes.

TRAVIS: You know my tactic.

TALIESIN: Would it be a nature check to actually think if I never learned about this in school?

MATT: This would be an intelligence check.

TALIESIN: This would be an intelligence check?

TRAVIS: We should use the volcano as part of our strategy. Like Moses–

SAM: There's a volcano?

TRAVIS: Well no, the pit–

SAM: Oh the lava, down below?

TRAVIS: Yeah, there's a shitload of that.

MARISHA: Can I meditate to see if I know anything about this–

LIAM: This seems to match up with the tales that my instructor, master Tharendril, told me about back in Syngorn. I wonder if I remember something. If only I had a small polyhedral to roll– Wow!

LAURA: Holy moly, you guys.

TRAVIS: Oh, shitcakes.

TALIESIN: It's a stack of pizzas.

MATT: Why are you guys so awesome?

LAURA: You guys are amazing!

MARISHA: Yeah, what the hell?

SAM: Do they know the address here? That's kinda creepy.

LAURA: Ah, thank you! I was wanting some ice tea!

MARISHA: Thanks chat room!

SAM: Thanks chat room!

LIAM: Thanks! Thank you, long list.

TRAVIS: May your list be ever long, with your– list.

MATT: So, best you can ascertain, you've never heard the term mind flayer. But in your people you've heard stories and tales growing up about something referred to as an illithid.

TRAVIS: A what?

SAM: An illithid?

MARISHA: An illithid.

MATT: A nasty entity, from beyond.

MARISHA: Illithid, with a D or a T?

MATT: With a D. As far as you know, all that you've heard, is that they were considered ghost stories, as a kid, to keep you from wandering dark caves and spaces. They would take your minds, and you thought this whole time that that was just a fable. That it was just a tale. But you do know that they normally aren't solitary; they usually keep company of a colony.

LAURA: (gasps)

TRAVIS: Fudge.

LIAM: Shit.

MARISHA: But I've never heard them called a mind flayer, but I guess they could be called a mind flayer. But we call them Illithids. I didn't know they were real, though.

LAURA: What do we do?

TRAVIS: Why don't we– Listen, when my Herd used to wander through the trees and we came upon a force that was greater than our own, we used the landscape to our ad-van-tage, so why don't we provoke an attack? And then retreat over the bridge.

SAM: And have them all jump over the edge of the cliff?

TRAVIS: You said they were all gray-eyed, right?

LAURA: At least they'll have to go one at a time, or two at a time across the bridge.

MARISHA: But Scanlan, didn't you also say that they were, like, levitating?

TRAVIS: What?

MATT: The one lengthy creature.

SAM: The one lengthy creature was levitating.

LAURA: Well, I mean, can he fly, or can he levitate?

SAM: Well yes, but I think what Grog is talking about is the bulk of the fighting force, getting them to follow us over the bridge and then cutting the bridge.

TRAVIS: Yeah, like in 300. Which was a great puppet show I saw.

ORION: Oh Grog, I heard that, where they used 300 puppets!

TRAVIS: Yeah.

ORION: It's amazing!

LAURA: Okay, I like this plan.

LIAM: What if all but a couple of us snuck into one of these buildings and waited and a couple of us made a stink and got a significant number of them to chase across the bridge.

SAM: That's a good idea.

LIAM: But then how could we cut the bridge behind? We have a flying carpet so we can go back and forth, but we could drop a significant number of them down into the lava.

MARISHA: Can we have Tiberius standing there to just Firebolt it?

TRAVIS: What's the bridge made of?

SAM: Do you want the rope?

ORION: Wait a minute. We want to bait them, is that what we're trying to do?

SAM: No, we want to drop the bridge and have them fall to their deaths.

LAURA: Or, Scanlan–

SAM: Yes?

LAURA: Or, what if you let off a stink bomb in the middle of the camp?

SAM: Well, they would run willy-nilly!

LAURA: Some of them would try to leave across the bridge.

SAM: Well remember, there's a tunnel on the other side of camp. They could run that way as well.

LIAM: It's also a huge, and your stink-cloud is only, you know, 20 or 30 feet across.

SAM: 20 feet.

TRAVIS: “Only”.

ORION: How long is the bridge?

MATT: The bridge, now that you've traversed it, it's ten feet wide, and runs about a little over 200 feet or 250 feet in length.

SAM: You can get a lot of them on that bridge and then cut it.

ORION: True.

TRAVIS: Makes their numbers count for nothing.

MARISHA: I think I've heard that one. That puppet show.

SAM: I like that idea.

ORION: I think I might have a solution.

LAURA: Yes, Tiberius? Speak your mind.

ORION: I think it's about time I used these.

TRAVIS: Oh shit.

ORION: For non-combat things. I think we should create a diversion, but let me do it. I can use my deck of illusions to generate any kind of number of sorts of creatures or whatever that I can control. I can simply toss one out, I believe 50 feet ahead of me, and control it and get their attention. I can draw them back through the bridge, using the illusions, taunting them along the way. They, of course, will give chase, because they are (chuckles) idiots. And, as soon as we get enough, we can all– you can hack away at the bridge all you like, Grog. We could both burn it, we could hack and burn.

TRAVIS: What kind of creatures can you make?

ORION: Well, that's all up to the deck.

SAM: It's up to the deck, or it's up to you?

ORION: It's up to the deck.

LAURA: Let's try it!

SAM: So, what if it's a scary thing that scares them away?

ORION: If I generate something such as– as exquisite as a red dragon, say, I'm sure somebody like the mindfellows– If they do flee, the camp will be empty and we can search it and free the slaves. If not, they will give chase and they will come and bait it. Either way, it works in our favor.

TRAVIS: Can I test something real quick? If I pull out the magic carpet or I take it back from whoever the fuck had it, and I stand on it, does it hold me up or do I sink?

MATT: You get on top of the carpet and you will it to begin to shift, and the carpet around you lifts, but you are anchoring it to the ground.

TRAVIS: So this is a big problem.

LAURA: But you've got Feather Fall. You've got Feather Fall! Is that still a thing?

TRAVIS: Yeah, which just slows my fall. It doesn't take me across.

SAM: That might not be a thing anymore.

ORION: I do have Feather Fall.

LAURA: But Levitate or something– but we could tie a rope to you and it can–

LIAM: It makes him lighter, yeah.

LAURA: – it makes you really light, and we can just drag you behind us. Yeah, it'll work.

SAM: Why do we need to float Grog?

TRAVIS: If we cut the bridge.

LAURA: In case we destroy the bridge.

SAM: Oh.

ORION: Oh, don't worry about that, Grog. I'll just cast Fly on you, because I can fly.

TRAVIS: You can just Fly me?

ORION: Yes. We can both fly.

TRAVIS: Okay.

LAURA: And you can Fly Trinket, too?

ORION: Of course, the bear.

LAURA: Of course.

TRAVIS: I'm down for doing this.

LAURA: Let's do it! Do it!

MARISHA: Flying from the–

ORION: We have ways across.

MARISHA: Okay, okay, hang on, hang on.

TALIESIN: This is a good plan.

SAM: Wait, wait, wait. Are we–

MARISHA: So, let's have a failsafe in case a few get across the bridge.

SAM: Let's also recap which plan we're going with. One of us creating a diversion and running away, or these mystical, magical–

TRAVIS: I like the mystical, magical–

SAM: – weird dragon creatures. What if they scare them the other way?

TALIESIN: It would have to be pretty scary. And then, hey, that works.

ORION: I just said, the path would be clear.

SAM: What if–

LIAM: Well, are we scaring them or are we luring them?

SAM: Also, might I remind–

ORION: It's all up to the deck.

SAM: We're luring them. And also, might I remind you all, that they're being mind controlled by this, what, illithid–

TRAVIS: Davy Jones.

LAURA: I feel like we should try to–

MARISHA: Illithid.

SAM: And if the illithid recognizes that your–

LAURA: Wait, wait!

SAM: – your things are false, then he's not going to send his men–

LAURA: That's true.

SAM: – off to chase them.

TALIESIN: Or he may send them to kill whoever is creating the illusion.

ORION: Exactly.

SAM: However, if we were– hm.

ORION: Either way, they're coming for us.

LAURA: Maybe we could create a distraction and bring them away from the tunnel's entrance and we can just sneak around them. No?

ORION: I mean, did you see a way to do that?

SAM: What? To sneak through the village to the tunnel? No! Not all seven of us. And a bear. Are you crazy?

(all laugh)

LAURA: Oh no, he's trying to kill us. All right.

TRAVIS: I'll stay on this side of the bridge, who wants to go be a distraction? Who wants to be the bait? Who's real fast?

SAM: Wait, are we doing his bait or are we doing a real bait?

TRAVIS: I don't–

ORION: We can try both.

TRAVIS: What if you cast something big and they turn it against us? That could suck.

ORION: Oh!

SAM: It's fake. It's just a hologram.

LAURA: It's not–

ORION: It's an illusion that I control.

TRAVIS: How about we throw one of those and send–

LAURA: Yeah.

TRAVIS: How about 50/50 it? One fake, one real. One of us, one of the cards.

LIAM: I'll go.

TRAVIS: Somebody be Gambit and throw that bitch.

MARISHA: We really just need someone to keep them from running through that tunnel.

LAURA: Yeah.

MARISHA: We need some way to keep them from coming– going–

LAURA: Can you send a card that looks like a dragon on the other side, in the tunnel, and then they run towards us.

MARISHA: Oh, oh, oh! Wait, wait.

TRAVIS: What's wrong with them running away from us?

SAM: Oh, snap.

MARISHA: I actually have a spell, while I was reading through my book last night, catching up on spells that I kinda forgot about. I learned something called Hallucinatory Terrain, where I can make the entire terrain look like whatever I want.

SAM: Other terrain or an animal?

MARISHA: Other terrain.

TRAVIS: They're mind controlled–

MARISHA: What I can do, is–

LAURA: You can make the chasm look like it's solid ground!

SAM: Can you make the chasm look like it's solid ground?

TRAVIS: Ooh!

MARISHA: I can make the chasm look like it's solid ground–

SAM: Can she do this?

MATT: She can try.

SAM: Yes!

TRAVIS: I like it!

MARISHA: I can make the tunnel across the way look like it's caved in.

LAURA: Make the big chasm look like solid ground. They'll fall off the edge!

TALIESIN: That's a great plan.

LIAM: That's a great idea, but let's–

ORION: I'll throw the illusion on the fake lands.

LIAM: – let's stack the deck, all right? I'm still gonna be live bait, because I have an inkling that that thing, whatever it is, with the tentacles on its face–

SAM: Is gonna see through that.

LIAM: – is going to see through it. So if we've got one real half-elf in the mix, he'll focus on me. So I'll take the flying carpet and tie it around my back.

LAURA: You better run fast and not get taken!

LIAM: I have boots of haste.

MARISHA: Are you good with hauling ass?

LIAM: Mm?

LAURA: (laughs)

MARISHA: Okay. As long as you can haul ass.

TRAVIS: All right.

LIAM: So I take the rug from Grog–

TRAVIS: Yep.

LIAM: I'm gonna roll it up and I tie it, I have a rope to tie it to my back.

LAURA: It's a big rug on your back.

TRAVIS: Saddle up, let's do it.

MATT: It's a very big rug.

LIAM: Is it?

MATT: What's your strength?

LIAM: It is–

LAURA: It's a big-ass rug.

SAM: Wait.

LIAM: 14?

LAURA: It'd be like carrying a–

MATT: It won't be cumbersome, necessarily.

MARISHA: Before Liam– before Vax leaves–

SAM: Wait! Might I interject? I'm so sorry.

MARISHA: Go ahead.

SAM: You guys– You and you will be hauling ass away from the charging horde–

LAURA: You? You're not–

TRAVIS: No, no–

LAURA: No, just him.

TRAVIS: I'm staying on our side of the bridge.

SAM: On our side.

TRAVIS: Our side.

LAURA: But he's got a rug, he's got the flying carpet.

TALIESIN: So we're gonna make them hallucinate–

SAM: So, when you get all the way to the other side of the bridge, then we're gonna chop.

TRAVIS: No.

LAURA: No, we're gonna chop it when they start coming across the bridge. We're hoping that they're gonna just fall off the edge instead.

ORION: Run off the bridge–

TRAVIS: They go, (yells)

SAM: Which side are we gonna chop it on? Our side or their side?

TRAVIS: Once he gets back to our side.

LAURA: Our side!

SAM: Okay.

TRAVIS: (yells) They come back, everybody falls in–

LIAM: What's the bridge made of? Is it just rope and wood?

SAM: Rope.

MATT: From what it looks like, it is rope and stone platforms.

LAURA: Oh.

LIAM: On both sides?

MATT: Like slats, slats of stone, that then the rope is tied around.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: It's a very, very thick, hefty twine.

LAURA: He can cut through that.

TRAVIS: All right. So Tiberius and Vax are going over.

LAURA: All right!

TRAVIS: Do it.

MARISHA: Before Vax leaves, I just put my hands on his shoulders, and I cast Enhance Ability on him, and give you a dexterity boost.

LIAM: Okay.

SAM: I'm also going to sing a little song–

MARISHA: So you have advantage on all dex rolls.

SAM: – for both of them–

LIAM: So what's the boost? How high is it?

SAM: – to inspire them.

MARISHA: You have the advantage–

LIAM: Advantage.

MARISHA: – on all dex rolls.

LIAM: On all dex rolls. All right.

MARISHA: If that comes to that.

LIAM: That's great, because that's how I attack.

MATT: Well, advantage on dex ability checks.

LIAM: Okay.

MARISHA: Ability checks.

MATT: Like acrobatics, things like that, sleight of hand, stealth.

LIAM: All right.

TRAVIS: Is Scanlan singing?

SAM: Oh, yes, I'll sing an inspiration song for both of them.

MATT: Okay, so–

SAM: (sings) Hey baby, hey baby, hey!

LIAM: But we need to–

SAM: (sings) Dwarves say. Dwarves say.

(all laugh)

SAM: (sings) Hey baby, hey baby, hey! On to the bridge and fall down.

(all laugh)

MATT: All right! So.

TRAVIS: Was that Gwen Stefani?

LAURA: All right! (laughs)

MATT: So, inspiration dice to Vax, and who else?

MARISHA: I hope this works.

MATT: Vax and who else? Gets inspiration dice? Scanlan.

SAM: Oh, I'm sorry, these two– Grog and Vax.

MATT: Okay. So both of you guys have a d8 of inspiration dice you can spend.

SAM: Oh! Are you going too?

LAURA: Yeah, no, Grog isn't going, Tiberius is going.

SAM: I'm sorry. Tiberius and Vax, then.

MATT: Okay. There you go.

TRAVIS: You could have gave it to me.

LIAM: But, Tiberius, walk on a bit behind me, and I'm gonna walk up to the edge of town, and I'm gonna chat.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Oh my god. What if you– What!

MATT: So, before this happens, where's everyone placed? You guys–

LIAM: Yeah, where are you guys–

LAURA: Oh my God.

MATT: You guys are across the bridge.

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: Where's the rest of you?

TALIESIN: I'm gonna set up on our side of the bridge, I'm gonna set up the Bad News gun and get ready to train it on whatever might try and come across.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Are there any big rock formations that I can sort of use as a shelter and kind of stay behind that but also peek around?

MATT: About 20 feet off from the edge, on the goblin side, there is one outcropping of, like, a large stalagmite that you could probably get behind.

LAURA: Oh, on the goblin side?

MATT: On the goblin side. Oh, do you wanna be on their side?

LAURA: I want to be on our side.

MATT: Your side, meaning the side that the war camp is on.

LAURA: No. I thought we were all on the other side of the bridge.

SAM: We're gonna stay on the side that doesn't have all the bad guys on it.

MATT: Right. There's the goblin side, which is where you guys first went through, there's the bridge, and then there's the war camp side.

LAURA and TRAVIS: Goblin side.

MATT: All right. So you're on– Goblin side for you, Goblin side for Grog–

TRAVIS: Yep.

MATT: Goblin side for Percy, setting up the Bad News, your crazy gun.

TALIESIN: Oh yeah.

LAURA: You're on the war camp side

TALIESIN: Gonna be great.

MATT: And Scanlan as well.

LIAM: Right, and I'm gonna run that, but you guys are all going back to–

LAURA: We're on the goblin side.

LIAM: The safer side. The further side.

LAURA: Yeah.

MARISHA: I'm gonna be– Can I be like halfway in between on the bridge? Is that a bad idea?

MATT: You can do that. It's up to you.

TRAVIS: Go for it! You can fly.

LAURA: Can she fly?

MATT: Turn into birds.

MARISHA: I can turn into a bird.

MATT: She's a druid.

LAURA: Oh! You can turn into a bird!

TRAVIS: Yeah. She's fine.

LAURA: How long does your spell cast? I mean, your spell last?

TRAVIS: (snickers)

LAURA: Shut up.

MARISHA: My– which one?

LAURA: Your illusion spell.

MARISHA: It's a concentration thing. So, as long as I can keep it up.

LAURA: So, maybe you should do that–

MARISHA: Oh. Yeah, for up to 30– 24 hours, actually. It's not a concentration spell.

LAURA: So, how far does it reach?

MARISHA: 300 feet.

LAURA: Okay.

MARISHA: 150 square feet.

MATT: Right. Okay.

LIAM: Just needs to–

MARISHA: And it looks, sounds–

LIAM: – work around the edge of the bridge.

MARISHA: – smells, like some other sort of natural terrain.

MATT: So, what are you going to make the terrain look like? What is your alteration?

MARISHA: So, what I'm doing, whenever we– can I make it look like there's a cave-in happening through the tunnel?

LAURA: (whispers) Wait! No! Make it look like it's really far–

LIAM: Keyleth, what if you fudged it so the cliff–

MARISHA: Well, that's what I'm gonna do.

LIAM: – looked like it went 30 feet further out.

MARISHA: Yeah. What I'm gonna do, I just want the terrain to look, on my side–

LIAM: Close to what they're used to.

MARISHA: I want the terrain to look exactly like what it is, but I just wanna stretch it out a little bit, so it looks like they've got, like, an extra running space.

MATT: Okay, okay.

LIAM: Yeah, so if it looks too different–

MATT: So like an additional 40 or so feet out from the actual–

MARISHA: Yes. Of actual, yes. Like the bridge is an extra 40 feet away.

MATT: Okay. The actual ceiling is maybe about 120 feet up, so it might be a little hard to do that, and cause a cave-in-type illusion.

MARISHA: Okay. Then I'll do that. Then I'm gonna just– you know what, I'm gonna stay on the opposite side of the bridge, and I'm gonna focus on making that illusion.

MATT: Okay. Cool. So you go ahead and you cast Hallucinatory Terrain–

MARISHA: Yep.

LAURA: (yells)

MATT: You now see an additional 40 feet of the cliff stretching out–

LAURA: It looks very realistic.

MARISHA: Thank you!

MATT: And you can actually see that the bridge looks attached to it, it's a very, very convincing illusion. And you kind of have to remind yourself that it's an illusion, just so you don't fall for it either!

MARISHA: Yes, be careful guys, please be careful!

MATT: All right. So you're kind of chilling in the middle of the bridge?

MARISHA: Mm-hm.

MATT: All right. The rest of you are–

MARISHA: All right, I'm on the outside of the bridge.

MATT: – on the other side– outside of the bridge.

MARISHA: I'm out with them.

MATT: Okay. So you're off the bridge now.

MARISHA: Gone. Yeah.

MATT: All right. So now, Tiberius, Vax, you guys walk across the bridge, keeping grip both side rails, feeling it rock to and fro from the continuous warm bellowing of wind up from the cavern beneath you. Eventually you bring your way across. What looks like you should be stepping on terrain is still the bridge, and it takes you a minute to adjust to the fact that you're still going across the bridge, but it looks like rocky terrain. Eventually you make it to the other side and you grab purchase on stone. Looking ahead of you, you can see about 60 feet ahead of you the outskirts of the war camp.

LIAM: Okay. Tiberius, you wait here, ready to run. I take Tiberius by the arm like this. Vox Machina.

ORION: Vox Machina.

(all laugh)

LIAM: Okay. So I stealthily walk up to the closing distance to the edge of town and I stand there. I click my boots of haste together.

LAURA: Oh god.

ORION: As he runs off I cast Greater Invisibility on myself.

MATT: All right.

ORION: I cast Fly on myself and I hover.

MATT: Both of those are concentration spells.

ORION: Fuck!

MATT: You can only have one of those up at any given point in time.

ORION: I'll cast Fly, then.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: Yes.

MATT: So you're now floating up. Okay.

LIAM: Okay.

ORION: And I'm at enough edge to where her illusions are, as well.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: But over the bridge just in case I fall.

LAURA: (laughs)

MATT: Okay, all right. So you're now just kinda hovering above the bridge now. You–

LIAM: I just clicked the boots.

MATT: You feel the sudden surge of magical energy through your body like adrenaline just pumping into your system.

LIAM: And I cry out full voice, listen up, you walking prawn, doom has come for you today. Step forth, you slimy bastard.

LAURA: Oh fuck.

(all laugh)

ORION: As he does that I toss out three cards.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: Oh gosh.

LIAM: Your trolls can't save you.

ORION: Right at the rim of where the illusion stops.

LAURA: I will find you.

LIAM: No matter how far or how long.

MATT: Been awhile since you've used those. (laughs) All right. Oh, okay. You shuffled these, right?

TRAVIS: We should call this a rim job.

ORION: Yes.

MATT: All right. This will be very, very interesting.

LIAM: Oh Jesus.

LAURA: Oh god.

TALIESIN: This is a good plan.

SAM: You got your dice?

TRAVIS: Sure it is.

LIAM: It's a great plan.

SAM: Use your dice.

MARISHA: Are you convincing yourself or are you–

TALIESIN: This is a good plan.

TRAVIS: We're on the safe side with Bad News and me.

TALIESIN: We're fine.

MARISHA: Yeah, I'm with you guys. We're fine.

MATT: So currently one of the cards bursts and you can see rising up from its energy this awful-looking humanoid skeletal undead creature with long golden red robes, with this gnarled gold crown and these glowing blue eyes and just pure arcane energy across this horribly gnarled skeletal face.

TRAVIS: Okay.

MATT: There stands this hideous-looking lich cackling to itself.

ORION: Ah, the ace of spades– two of spades, it changed, dammit. Looking at Pathfinder right now.

(all laugh)

ORION: Two of spades.

LIAM: Tiberius, can we hit it and quit it?

LAURA: What are the other ones?

MATT: The other one (poof) and you see before you a kind of –

ORION: Flip them over, they have good graphics on the cover.

MATT: It's nice. Through the smoke, you see what looks like some sort of a human kind of long, long-fighting warrior, grizzled, ready to fight, has a big old longsword out, armored up in scalemail, one eye is kinda wounded, and he just kinda sits there and growls with his blade ready. The third card. From the smoke appears a red-skinned dragonborn with long blue robes and a staff with a glowing beam of light on it.

TRAVIS: Yes.

ORION: Oh. It must be a joker.

MATT: You see an exact duplicate of Tiberius now standing there as the three illusions stand.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Outstanding.

MARISHA: That's perfect.

MATT: Your cards are now spent, correct?

ORION: Uh, no, they exist until I dispel them.

MATT: Right, but I mean the actual cards don't go back in the deck.

ORION: Yes, they do.

MATT: They do, okay. All right, never mind. Okay. As you shout out, the card illusion appears. You see about five or six duergar kind of look out from a nearby tent and go– and then start running toward the center of the town.

MARISHA: Come here, bitches

MATT: About 20 seconds pass. And then you start hearing this (boom boom boom boom). It sounds like a drum beat.

LAURA: Oh my god.

SAM: Cut the rope, cut the rope.

LAURA: Not yet, not yet, not yet.

SAM: Leave Vax there, let's go.

(all laugh)

MATT: At this point, you now see about 16 duergar come running out from the center of town, armored, weapons drawn, a few with crossbows, two trolls and an ogre charging out. You see the ogres holding this giant– it looks like a stone slab for one of its clubs, and the two trolls just come with their claws open, rushing right towards you and the illusions.

LAURA: Oh my gosh.

LIAM: I start flipping–

ORION: I command the lich to start doing one of his glowy spells, and, like, through him, I go: (whispers) Come for us, your death awaits.

(all laugh)

MATT: All right.

LIAM: And I flip the double birds and start walking backwards a little bit.

SAM: Oh yes, that's even better!

MARISHA: Just watch your step!

LIAM: Yes, straight back.

ORION: I command the soldier to start swinging his sword.

MATT: As you're stepping back, four of the duergar immediately take, using their inertia, pull and release javelins in your direction.

LIAM: Okay.

LAURA: Oh god!

MATT: All right, what's your AC?

LAURA: Oh gosh.

LIAM: My AC is 19.

MATT: All right, you take two javelins–

LIAM: I'm gonna use Uncanny Dodge. For anything I can see, I can dodge for half damage, if I need to.

MATT: All right, good to know. The first one strikes you in the torso for a total of 11 damage.

LIAM: Shit, okay.

ORION: Oh.

MATT: The other hits you for a total of eight damage.

LIAM: Is that the halved or–?

ORION: Total.

MATT: No, well, you can choose to half one. It's up to you, you choose which one. Probably the higher one.

LIAM: Okay, so, it was 11 and eight?

MATT: So it would be six.

LIAM: Okay, six and eight, okay, 14.

MATT: 14 points of damage with these just javelins hitting you like, oh, that's right. They have range!

(all laugh)

LIAM: Right, I knew this was coming.

LAURA: Right!

MATT: You can immediately see one of the trolls goes and just lunges forward and slashes the lich, just passing through its form.

ORION: He lunges at the lich?

MATT: Yeah.

ORION: Sweet!

MATT: It went through, it kinda loses its footing for a second, stops and kinda looks angry, turns and starts slashing at it again.

LAURA: Run! Run away!

SAM: – fake ground.

ORION: And I'm like–

MARISHA: Yeah, isn't he on the fake ground? The lich?

ORION: Yes, yeah, he's like right at the edge.

MATT: Yeah, right at the precipice.

ORION: I can't throw my card on the fake ground. They'd fall.

MATT: Yeah, so the troll kind of steps forward–

ORION: They're right at the edge, though.

MATT: – and the troll turns around and starts slashing. The other one goes right for the veteran. And (laughs) goes running right off the edge.

LAURA: (gasps)

ALL: Yes!

SAM: The troll?

MATT: That was the troll, just (falling sounds). The ogre goes running forward, right towards you.

ORION: I command the–

LIAM: Yes?

MATT: Just their speed, they're just the first ones to get there. Duergar have tiny legs.

LIAM: (high-pitched voice) Where's the roll for initiative, man?

LAURA: You're already back, you're at the bridge!

MATT: This is what I'm saying, what are you doing? This is your reactionary part. We're just taking– this isn't a battle, this is–

LIAM: Yeah, I'm backing it up, I'm running, man.

MATT: All right, so you go charging back onto the bridge. As you go running, all right, both trolls and the ogre have just gone off the side.

LAURA: Badass!

(all cheer)

MATT: You hear them screaming as they tumble into the darkness.

LIAM: I'm laughing as I run.

TRAVIS: Didn't occur to me that there is a bridge–

MATT: About four duergar also go spilling over the side, screaming as they tumble into the darkness.

TRAVIS: Yes!

MATT: The rest of them stop, kind of look around and–

SAM: This was a great plan!

ORION: I start– as that's happening, I start to pull back and float away and I'm commanding all of my guys to come through the bridge. Because I can command them within 30 feet. So they're now, they're all within 30 feet of me, retreating as well.

MATT: Okay. As this is happening, you can now see some of the members of the duergar that are now at the edge are some of the elite guard, with the blackened armor you saw. They both kinda step forward and put their foot out, feeling for purchase, give a nod, pull out their swords, and start hacking at the bridge immediately.

SAM: (gasps) Oh shit.

LAURA: Shit.

TALIESIN: All right, I'm taking a shot.

LAURA: Can we– does our aim reach? Our ranged

attacks, do they reach?

SAM: (whispers) You, fly?

TRAVIS: No, he's got it.

LAURA: Do ranged attacks reach?

MATT: From this distance, it's gonna be a serious penalty.

TALIESIN: I'm not!

MATT: You don't, because you–

TALIESIN: I'm taking that shot, because I can shoot forever.

MATT: Go for it.

ORION: (gunshot)

LIAM: I'm untying the carpet quickly.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Oh, for the love of god and all that is holy.

MARISHA: (groans) Oh, no.

TALIESIN: Misfire, I gotta–

LAURA: I can at least try, right?

MATT: Go ahead and roll. As you– You're at disadvantage.

LAURA: Fail so hard.

MATT: As your arrow (shooting sound) off, you (gun misfiring sound) and there's a slight delay, and you wonder, why isn't it working? And this horrible explosion sound bursts out as you can now see, black and red smoke pouring out of the front of the barrel of Bad News, and it burns your hands for a second and you're like, ah, shit, take a second to–

TALIESIN: All right, so I gotta stop and clean.

MATT: Yeah, however, because you are unable to halt that, both of those duergar take shots at the bridge.

TALIESIN: Damn it.

MATT: Both hit with their swords.

MARISHA: Are you on the carpet, Vax?

TRAVIS: He's getting it out.

LIAM: I don't know, I said I was.

LAURA: Get on it, now.

MATT: As you're running and pulling the carpet out–

LIAM: Yes!

MATT: – the bridge is cut clean–

LAURA: (gasps)

MARISHA: Son of a bitch.

MATT: – and begins to fall out from under you.

LIAM: Okay.

MATT: You go pulling out the–

LIAM: Acrobatics check?

MARISHA: Use them dex saves!

MATT: This is gonna go ahead and be a dex check now.

MARISHA: You've got advantage!

MATT: You do.

LAURA: Oh, good.

LIAM: Okay, good, because the first roll was a

one. The second roll was a 19.

ORION: Yes!

LIAM: Plus! Plus, plus, plus nine is 28.

TRAVIS: Oh my god! You almost died!

MATT: All right. You pull out the carpet. As you're going to set it down, as you feel the bridge beginning to like, give out from under you, you feel this creepy sensation pushing towards the back of your head.

LAURA: Oh no!

LIAM: Mm-hm.

MATT: You guys, looking across, you can see now a familiar cloaked figure has emerged.

(all gasp)

SAM: Oh shit!

LIAM: I drew him out.

LAURA: Clean your gun, clean your gun!

TALIESIN: I'm cleaning my gun.

MATT: Go ahead and make a willpower saving throw.

TRAVIS: Get your bow ready.

LAURA: I am, I'm ready, it's too far!

LIAM: I survive a free fall and you hit me with that right after? Yeah, will save?

MATT: Willpower save.

LIAM: So that's– what is it, I've never done that? That's–

MATT: It's at the top of your sheet of your stats, above your stats, on the right of your stats. Oh, it's your wisdom saving.

LIAM: Wisdom, okay.

MATT: Wisdom.

LIAM: Ow, not very good. Seven.

MATT: Seven.

LAURA: No!

MATT: As you are running, you get the carpet out, you leap onto it and your whole sense and awareness of your surroundings just fades from you. You just feel your entire body going numb for a second and you just feel yourself falling.

MARISHA: Holy shit.

LAURA: Fly down! Get him! Get him!

MATT: Falling back.

ORION: Oh! Oh bother! Shoo! I go get him!

LIAM: 29 dex save right down the toilet.

MATT: You go and swoop down, fly. You manage to–

ORION: Is he conscious?

MATT: He is just staring up at this moment.

ORION: Very good. I go just to touch him, I am not trying to pull him up.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: What? Try to grab him! Try to grab him!

LIAM: Fly, he can fly me.

SAM: He is falling!

ORION: He is falling. Fly!

LIAM: Like Superman.

MATT: You cast Fly on him? All right!

ORION: Now fly, damn it.

MATT: He is still just kind of standing there, not doing anything. As you finish casting the Fly spell, your Fly spell dissipates because it's a concentration spell and you can have one at a given time.

ORION: Wait, you're unconscious?

LIAM: I don't know what I am.

ORION: I ask right now, is he–

MARISHA: He's like catatonic.

ORION: He is, okay. Then I don't do that, because you can't fly yourself, so I do grab him, this time.

MATT: Okay, you grab him as his whole weight goes onto you. What's your strength?

ORION: Oh my god.

LIAM: It has been nice knowing you, ladies and gentlemen.

ORION: 12.

LAURA: No, no, no.

MATT: Go ahead and make an athletics check.

MARISHA: Come on, Tiberius.

LAURA: Can we see this all happening off to the side?

SAM: Plus eight.

LAURA: Keyleth!

TALIESIN: It's happening very fast.

LIAM: Oh, shit, can I use–

ORION: It's a 21.

MATT: 21? You rush down, diving, you grab the back of his armor. As you yank up on him, you manage to just pull him across and get him to the other edge. The flying carpet, however, has plummeted down in–

ALL: No!

TRAVIS: Son of a bitch.

LAURA: You lost our flying carpet, you unconscious bastard!

MATT: However, Tiberius swoops up. You guys just see them both plummet into darkness and then flying up at the edge of the crevasse on your side, Tiberius clutching your brother, currently just staring off into space and dropping him down with a dull sound.

LAURA: Vax!

MATT: The bridge slaps onto the side of the cavern.

LIAM: Mawp.

LAURA: And I run over to Vax.

LIAM: Mawp.

LAURA: And I'm like trying to figure out what's wrong with him.

TRAVIS: The magic carpet is done?

MATT: It just disappeared into the darkness below.

LAURA: Oh no!

TRAVIS: (tearfully) I have to erase it.

MARISHA: Bye, carpet.

TALIESIN: No.

SAM: That was our ticket across the chasm.

LIAM: Yes.

MARISHA: I loved that carpet, damn it.

MATT: About a minute passes or so, you come back to your senses.

LAURA: Oh, good.

LIAM: I got to get the carpet.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Can I clean my gun?

ORION: I slap him with Mage Hand. Snap out of it!

LIAM: What happened? What happened?

TRAVIS: Wait, do we leave or–

LAURA: No, wait–

TALIESIN: They are still across there, aren't they?

MATT: You can see across the way that there are a bunch of them just standing at the edge.

TALIESIN: I wanna take a shot at the–

LAURA: At the–

LIAM: Noodle-face, yeah.

MATT: Okay, go for it.

LAURA: Oh, man!

SAM: You can see them and they control you.

LAURA: Right in the noggin.

LIAM: Shoot it in the eye, man.

ORION: Not from that distance, I don't think. His sniper rifle goes far.

TALIESIN: Hm, that's a 23.

MATT: Okay, go ahead and roll the damage. Across the way you can hear the resounding (gunshot).

TALIESIN: Ah, yeah! That don't suck! 20 points of damage.

MATT: 20 points of damage! Nice. You just see this blast of red and flame across the way and the figure is just knocked off its feet, about ten feet back.

(all laugh)

LAURA: Can you shoot him again?

TALIESIN: Yes.

MARISHA: It's just a carnival game for Percy at this point.

MATT: At this point in time you can now see the duergar looking up and backing away from the cliff side.

TALIESIN: Yeah.

MATT: You come to the bridge, which is just dangling off the side now.

LIAM: We're on the goblin side, now?

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: You're on the goblin side and the bridge is just dangling down into darkness.

TALIESIN: That felt pretty good, too.

LIAM: Who wants to have a picnic?

ORION: I mean, seriously.

MARISHA: So how many (monster sounds) are ove there?

MATT: You only saw the one.

MARISHA: And how many duergar left? How many–

ORION: Yes, how many are left after all that?

MARISHA: After they fell into–

MATT: After all that, you saw a few more kind of filter out from the town, you have probably about 25 visible at that moment that have all backed.

TALIESIN: I'm going to hang on him visually and I'm gonna wait to take another shot until he tries to stand up again.

MATT: Okay.

TALIESIN: So if he tries to stand up again, I want to shoot him again.

LAURA: But wait, you can shoot him while he's on the ground! Can't you?

TALIESIN: That's so much more fun to wait.

MATT: You can shoot him, but it's at disadvantage to shoot someone who's prone.

LAURA: He's on the ground?

MATT: Yeah.

TALIESIN: Technically, he's got cover. And it's funnier to just wait.

MATT: A moment passes and he kind of drifts back up. Take another shot.

TALIESIN: Taking another shot.

MARISHA: Come on, Percy.

LIAM: Come on, baby.

TALIESIN: He's such an asshole.

MARISHA: Like fish in a barrel.

LIAM: Come on, Von Rolo!

TALIESIN: 15.

MATT: 15? Unfortunately, it does not hit.

LIAM: (ricochet noise)

MATT: At that distance, with the darkness, it's very hard to get your bead on him at that point. So you (gunshot), fires off, you can now see it drift away–

LAURA: Fudge!

MATT: – and all the rest of the duergar are now retreating into the city.

TALIESIN: Man!

LAURA: What're you gonna do? All of our shit's gone.

MARISHA: Okay.

TRAVIS: Okay. What're we gonna do? Leave?

LAURA: Maybe we can– can we walk up and see–

ORION: Let's take a short rest.

LAURA: – if we can find another bridge?

ORION: While we're figuring this out.

MATT: If you want to. Okay. So you walk over to the edge, and you kind of look across to the sides. Make a perception check.

TALIESIN: I'll assist.

LAURA: Oh, 20!

LIAM: 20.

TALIESIN: Never mind!

LAURA: No, no assistance needed.

MATT: Natural 20?

LIAM: Yeah.

TALIESIN: Never mind.

MATT: Natural 20.

LAURA & LIAM: Yes.

MATT: Plus–

LAURA: Plus my perception?

LIAM: (high-pitched) Natural 20 motherfucker!

LAURA: My perception is six.

LIAM: (high-pitched) Automatic win!

MATT: You glance over the side–

(all laugh)

MATT: – and looking down, you can see the bridge is just kind of like drifting from the air that's flowing, and you can just see the– and it's not like the whole bottom floor is all lava, there's just streaks of it pouring down from whatever the interior of this lower chasm is. You see, at the edge of the rope break, which goes down for a good 150, 200 feet or so, dangling, and there's a tiny little flicker of material–

LAURA: (gasps)

MATT: – wrapped up in the ropes of the rope bridge.

LAURA: Oh my god.

TRAVIS: It's the carpet!

SAM: Material? It's the carpet!

MATT: It's the carpet! It seems to be the carpet.

TALIESIN: Okay. We have an infinite rope!

MARISHA: Oh! Go!

LAURA: We have infinite rope! I'm gonna tie it to myself–

ORION: Wait, hold on a second–

TALIESIN: We're gonna lower you down.

ORION: Is it still– it's just at the end of the– all the way down there?

MATT: Mm-hm.

ORION: So I fly down there–

LAURA: No– aww.

ORION: – and go get it!

SAM: Yeah, that makes sense.

LAURA: Oh, all right.

ORION: It's still in effect!

MATT: Mm-hm.

SAM: Okay, watch out for that warm air, whatever that was.

MATT: So.

ORION: Ooh. You're right. I take out an empty bottle while I do this.

MATT: All right. You glide down along the base of the cut rope bridge, and there, just barely hanging on by just haphazardly falling and tangling itself in the ropes is the flying carpet. As you float down, you now get a little bit of a better view, as your staff is lit, you can see, about another 150 feet down below you, a little bit of a reflection of your light. It's currently just kind of rippling and shifting.

LAURA: (gasps) It's water down there?

MARISHA and SAM: It's water?

MATT: It appears to be some sort of water surface below you. About 150 feet down.

SAM: I thought there was lava–

TRAVIS: I run and jump off the cliff!

MATT: There are streaks of lava–

LAURA: No you don't.

MATT: – pouring, like from the ceiling and portions of the wall–

TRAVIS: Yep, and I jumped all the way down.

LAURA: It's 1,000 feet down.

MATT: – but it's all just kind of pouring down and pooling at the edges and then cooling.

LAURA: It's 1,000 feet.

LIAM: That's a big belly flop.

TRAVIS: I have great form in mid-air.

SAM: So there, it's a river–

ORION: And you don't know this yet.

LAURA: Do you want to die?

MATT: And you can see the waterfall, it's cascading over the side–

TRAVIS: It's water.

LAURA: You're being incredibly childish. Don't do that.

MATT: – is currently rushing past you at about 30 feet to your right, and it seems to be splashing into this pool below.

LAURA: Don't. Dive. 1,000 fucking feet.

ORION: Waterfall. Ah! I retrieve the magic carpet.

MATT: You grab the magic carpet, you roll it up, make your way back up to the surface.

MARISHA: Carpet!

ORION: Ah, here you are. By the way, cool stuff down there. It's actually not lava, it's water! Aha. Believe it or not.

LAURA: Water? How far down from the bridge?

ORION: It's about 150 feet from the bridge, but it's about 1,000 feet down all the way. We could traverse down, somehow, and I think it would be a nice place to go explore.

SAM: Place to go explore?

ORION: Especially because we have nothing else to do, and–

SAM: Well, we could go to the camp and go kick some–

LAURA: Well, look, we know– we can't get over there.

SAM: But we have a carpet now!

ORION: Oh, that's right.

LAURA: Oh.

TRAVIS: Yeah, but we go over one at a time and then we're waiting for–

MARISHA: Ah, fly me down with you.

LAURA: The thing is–

SAM: The three of us can fly.

MARISHA: Tiberius and I are going to fly down.

LAURA: The thing is, we know that–

MARISHA: On the carpet.

LAURA: – deeper down is where they've gone.

MARISHA: Yes. That's true.

LAURA: So probably it'd be best to go down. We could have avoided all of this bullshit if we'd just have known–

LIAM: But we didn't know, and if there's–

MARISHA: I don't wanna fight, I don't wanna fight that guy.

LIAM: – if there's more than one of them these, though, he's gone boodle-oodle-ooo to his friends right now, I mean–

LAURA: Right.

LIAM: – if we can it'd be good to put this guy in the ground.

SAM: I'm all for going–

MARISHA: I don't know. Okay, take me down–

SAM: There's a tunnel back there–

MARISHA: Hang on, let me, let's go see, let's go see.

SAM: – back, past that village, that they're protecting.

ORION: Well, I'm still flying, you can take– Percy, would you like to come?

TALIESIN: Oh, all right.

MARISHA: I've– to ride the carpet down to the bottom with Percy and Tiberius.

ORION: Well, I– whoever's going down should be on the carpet, 'cause I can still fly.

MARISHA: Right.

ORION: So, I don't need it.

MARISHA: Me and Percy are on the carpet.

MATT: All right, so the two of you get on the carpet, you drift down, and you begin to make your way down this giant crevasse. As you get down, the air gets warmer and warmer, and you begin to see as you come down, a good 600 feet now at this point, into this much larger space than the one you guys are currently above. It's like a giant, triangular, open cavern down here. It kind of funnels up into where the bridge was.

MARISHA: Do I see any tunnels, or areas that look like it leads someplace of interest?

MATT: As you look down, there is definitely a large pool of water that leads off into a few other underground rivers that spill off into the mountainside itself. There are sections of the wall where lava is pouring out, where there seems to be some sort of a vent or some sort of opening into some magma reserve, and there are about three of them that are pouring out, and kind of drifting down. One of them is pooling and cooling as it hits the water, and it's just kind of this perpetually glowing mass of slow-growing rock. There also appears to be one that is just continuing to flow that leads, kind of, back in the direction where you guys came, but underneath. There's one big lava pool that is spilling, and then kind of giving a little bit of light to the inside of a tunnel that continues further down at a decline. The opposite side–

SAM: Lava tunnels? What, are you crazy?

MARISHA: I keep going.

SAM: Sorry, yes?

MATT: That's okay.

MARISHA: Are you done?

MATT: On the opposite side, you can see there's a small outcropping and a smaller waterfall that is pouring out of the side of the mountain, like another sea is now meeting the river underneath, and that is just kind of cascading out from the side of the rock, dropping about 30 or 40 feet, and hitting the edge of the rock pool.

MARISHA: Okay.

LIAM: On Cthulhu's side, you're talking about?

MATT: On Cthulhu's side. Yeah.

ORION: I think we should–

MARISHA: I say, Tiberius, give me some light?

ORION: Oh!

MARISHA: And I take– and I cast Control Water, and I just take the pool– the water in the bottom of the pool, and I bend it, and I part the pool, and I take it and I cascade it all the way up, following the lava flows.

MATT: Okay. Just so you're aware, the pool is about 600 feet across.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: I can part seas with this.

MATT: Right. So you can part elements of it, but

like, it is a large, large, large body of water.

MARISHA: Oh, okay, okay. Well I'm taking– okay. I don't necessarily part it, but I take the water, and I draw it up, cascading along the edges following all the lava streams going into the tunnels.

MATT: Okay, another thing you notice, is there are two trolls and an ogre currently trying to stay afloat, as one of them just (sucking sound) gets pulled under the water.

LAURA: Gets pulled under?

MATT: Yes.

SAM: (yells)

MATT: You begin moving the water to the sides and you begin to cool some of the lava flows.

ORION: Oh, that's awesome.

MATT: You can see the glowing red magma begin to cool to a dark black and become solid. As it does you can see parts of it crack, as the magma's still pushing out. But you're definitely staunching the flow.

MARISHA: I'm gonna kind of push it, you said there was a tunnel kind of going up into Cthulhu side?

MATT: Yeah, there is a tunnel that seemed– the opening leads to the back, and there's a waterfall that is pouring out from that side.

ORION: Waterfall.

MARISHA: There's a waterfall.

MATT: Waterfall.

ORION: Not a lava fall.

MATT: The lava flow is going down the opposite direction.

MARISHA: But there's like a tunnel kind of carving out that way?

MATT: Yeah. Like a large opening that continues further down.

MARISHA: Okay, I take all of the water, and I really just concentrate, and I gather just a big tube, and I push it down that tunnel.

MATT: Okay, so the best– the water that you gather from this, you force into a quick geyser in that direction. As it sprays across the front, you can see it begins to cool some of the magma. It's a pretty hefty flow, you manage to slow it, and you do cool parts of it, but it's gonna be difficult and take you a while, if you're just constantly pushing water on it, to give the flow any sort of serious stop. You notice the lava flow doesn't coat the entire floor of the tunnel, just a side of it. It's almost like there's some portion of it that is walkable, adjacent to the lava.

ORION: We can also go in the not-lava cave, Keyleth.

MARISHA: I'm sorry, that lava cave just looks important.

ORION: I know. Because of the lava.

MARISHA: Yeah.

ORION: Let's go tell the others what we've found, and then we'll come back and decide which way to go.

MARISHA: Okay, okay.

TALIESIN: Sometimes a lava cave is just a lava cave.

ORION: I fly back up.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: Guys. Blah-blah-blah-blah.

SAM: So here's my thoughts.

MATT: The other troll. (sucking sound) Pulled beneath the surface.

SAM: Yeah, so, I don't wanna go down there–

MARISHA: Also, it looks like there's something eating those trolls.

SAM: – there's things pulling trolls. Yeah, let's not go down there where there's things eating trolls! Why don't we just–

ORION: In the water?

SAM: Yeah!

MATT: Yeah. In the giant water pool in the bottom.

LAURA: Wait, but we're gonna have to go down eventually, so.

LIAM: Maybe.

SAM: Why?

LAURA: Okay.

SAM: Why do we have to go down there, there's nothing that we need down there!

ORION: But across the way is a 25-man battle with a huge, nasty boss.

SAM: There's seven of us and one of us is Grog!

LAURA: Well, everybody keeps saying that everything is deeper and deeper, so I think we're gonna have to go–

MARISHA: Yeah.

LAURA: – deep down. Eventually.

MARISHA: I agree with Vex on this one.

LIAM: Well, hold on.

SAM: Deep into the tunnels.

LIAM: All those assholes are still standing on the edge across there. Do we have– we've flown out of a falling tower before, we were all able to do it, can we just fly up and over those shitheads and go towards the tunnel?

ORION: Not with the eye of that mind flayer.

LAURA: Yeah. It can grab us.

MARISHA: Yeah, look what it did to you!

ORION: I don't trust it.

LAURA: Exactly.

LIAM: Can't we go 150 feet in the air, and–

LAURA: The tunnel doesn't go that high.

MARISHA: I think you were at least 150 feet across that bridge when he did that to you.

LAURA: Yeah. It can grab us from there.

SAM: We can try–

LIAM: I was on the bridge when that happened–

MATT: You were on the bridge when that happened, you were–

LIAM: – and fell down. I wasn't way above.

MARISHA: But the bridge was like 250 feet across, right?

MATT: Right. You were about, loosely, 80 feet across when it got you.

LIAM: When it got me.

ORION: So its range is probably like 100 feet.

LIAM: And you said it's 150-ish feet in here, though, to the ceiling?

MATT: To the ceiling it's about 150 feet, yeah.

LIAM: We can go–

LAURA: But the tunnel, oh–

TALIESIN: They have ranged weapons as well.

LAURA: (quietly) I think we should go down!

SAM: But what is down there?

TRAVIS: If we don't find out.

LAURA: Kima!

TRAVIS: You can drop me like a depth charge.

SAM: But there's no sign of anything intelligent down there, other than something that's eating trolls underwater. It could be just giant whales down there! We have no idea! There's no sign of humans at all! It's lava and death animals!

LAURA: Maybe, okay. If I go down there–

ORION: There's more like tunnels, that go further–

LAURA: – and look in one of the tunnels–

MARISHA: Tunnels that go deeper!

LAURA: – can I look in one of the tunnels and see if I find tracks? If I do, can we go that way?

SAM: How're you gonna go in the tunnels?

LAURA: I've got a flying carpet!

SAM: There's lava!

LAURA: There's tunnels that don't have lava flowing into them.

SAM: If you burn–

MARISHA: And I can control water for at least an hour.

ORION: There's, so, down there, there's a big pool of water–

MARISHA: It lasts a while.

ORION: – a tunnel going towards the mind flayer side, with no lava–

LAURA: Exactly!

ORION: – and then there's another cave with lava–

LAURA: There is a tunnel that we can walk in.

ORION: – that we can go, going away from him.

TALIESIN: Let's see if there's anything resembling tracks–

LAURA: Yes!

MARISHA: I'll go with Vex that-a-way. I can cool lava as we go.

LAURA: Please, Scanlan, let me look for tracks. Please?

SAM: Tracks in a river?

LAURA: Tracks in a tunnel.

SAM: It's not that kind of a tunnel!

LAURA: It is!

SAM: There's water flowing in it!

MATT: There is, on– Okay. In a giant cavern, there is, towards the side where you guys kind of entered, underneath where you first came in–

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: – there is a descending, large tunnel, of which there are a series of lava flows that kind of pool into one river of lava that covers half of that path down–

LAURA: Okay.

LIAM: In the direction of goblin town.

MATT: Correct.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: Towards the other side, the–

LIAM: The Cthulhu side.

MATT: The cavern ends and there is a waterfall pouring out of the side of the wall–

SAM: Can't go in there.

MATT: – that just kind of flows down–

SAM: Oh, so there's a cavern opening?

MATT: No, no. There is a– there– well, there is essentially a hole where water is pouring out of.

SAM: Can't go in there.

LAURA: Oh.

MARISHA: We can go in there!

TALIESIN: But we can go in the one with lava.

SAM: There's water pouring out of it!

MARISHA: I can make that stop happening.

SAM: But what would we find in a tunnel with water pouring out of it? It's not like anything lives up there!

MARISHA: I'm just– I would much rather face random beasts who are just random beasts, than mind flayers who can suck my brain out.

TALIESIN: There would be no random beasts, though, it's just nothing but plumbing.

LIAM: Yes, but Kima did not fall prey to random beasts, she fell prey to these shits.

LAURA: All right, fine! Let's do whatever you guys want to do.

MARISHA: I think– I don't think a boss battle– I don't think we can fight this guy and win!

TRAVIS: Vote. Vote. For fuck's sake, vote. Put it to a vote.

LIAM: Vote, yes.

SAM: All right. All in favor of going to the duergar village and facing the giant fucker.

LIAM: Up and over, up and over!

SAM: Or up and over. Or at least getting past it. That direction. That's four of us.

TRAVIS: That's four.

SAM: All in favor of going into the lava flows, to find something.

LAURA: Water holes!

LIAM: Water holes or fire holes?

MARISHA: Water holes!

SAM: Mm. Mm.

MARISHA: Tiberius, you haven't voted!

ORION: A Draconian does not vote.

TRAVIS: What are you, Switzerland? C'mon.

LAURA: It's four against us anyway.

MARISHA: A Draconian– you come from a political family!

LAURA: We gotta go that way.

ORION: Well, I don't vote. I don't believe in our system. Anyway, that's none of your business.

SAM: Are you a communist?

(all laugh)

ORION: I don't know what that means!

LIAM: Now. Tiberius can fly, Keyleth is an eagle who can carry a gnome, and maybe my sister?

LAURA: Ugh, no.

LIAM: And that leaves Percy and Grog and I on the flying carpet. Can it hold our weight? Let's give it a little test?

LAURA: And Trinket!

MARISHA: Okay, well, if this doesn't work, we're going to the tunnel.

MATT: The flying carpet can't carry Grog on his own.

LAURA: No, then I can't carry Grog.

TALIESIN: You can, on the other hand, use–

MARISHA: Can't– wait, wait, wait. Why can't, why can't Vex and I just, at least, go check it out before we do this?

LIAM: You lost the vote, Keyleth. You lost the vote.

MARISHA: (sighs)

LAURA: I think we should go.

LIAM: Feather Fall–

MARISHA: Let's do it! Fuck it!

LAURA: Going!

MARISHA: They don't control us!

LAURA: We're going.

MARISHA: Let's do it. We're going.

MATT: All right, So, what, you ladies hop on the flying carpet?

LAURA & MARISHA: Yes.

LIAM: The fellowship has broken.

MATT: (laughs) So, as you guys are discussing this–

SAM: Wait, you're stealing our flying carpet?

(all laugh)

MATT: The two ladies have leaped on the flying carpet–

MARISHA: We're just checking it out! We're coming back! We're coming back.

LAURA: We're coming back!

ORION: Throw a red one! Throw a red one.

MARISHA: Just wait ten god damn minutes.

MATT: They shout, as they disappear, into the darkness below the cavern.

LIAM: The mind flayer isn't on pause!

LAURA: Okay, I could, I have, wait! I have a–

ORION: That was gonna go right in my mouth!

LAURA: I have a lantern.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Yeah. Cause I have a dungeoneering kit.

TALIESIN: Oh, cool! Yellow.

MATT: All right. So you pull out your lantern, as the two of you are going down towards the water–

LAURA: Part the water!

MATT: – the rest of you kind of stand at the edge of the crevasse going, 'Uh…'

ORION: I follow. I follow.

LAURA: Part the water!

MARISHA: I take the river flow, where the water's flow is coming out of this waterfall–

LIAM: Meanwhile the mind flayer's saying,

(gravelly voice) 'I haven't got all day.'

MARISHA: – and I reverse it.

MATT: All right. So as you guys float down–

ORION: I follow.

MATT: – the two trolls that were missing– the ogre is not anywhere to be seen.

TRAVIS: Fly, you fools!

LIAM: (laughs)

MATT: – there's just a slight ripple in the water's surface.

LAURA: We don't wanna land, we just wanna go towards the tunnel.

MATT: Right. As you staunch the water supply of this waterfall, it just kind of holds it in place, with enough of a force that the water coming out is being balanced by the force you're putting back on it, it's just kind of holding it there.

LAURA: Can you lower the water, so we can fly–

MATT: However, as the water vanishes, beneath where the waterfall was, you can see an actual small tunnel that's carved into the rock–

LAURA: Fuck all y'all bitches!

TALIESIN: Whoa. (laughs)

LIAM: Well, wanna go down?

LAURA: Let's go in there!

TRAVIS: That doesn't do anything yet! We don't know!

LAURA: Let's go into the tunnel.

SAM: Meanwhile, back up top, I'm saying, they're not gonna find anything. They're not gonna find any tunnels.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Yeah, I'm agreeing with Scanlan, and I am mooning off the cliff's face.

LAURA: So I'm stealthing, let's stealth? Let's be very quiet.

MARISHA: Okay.

ORION: Hold on.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: Can you turn into an animal?

ORION: I fly back up to tell them what's going on.

MARISHA: Oh, I can!

I go into a black panther form.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: Scanlan, remember when we had women in this party?

LAURA: Okay, and I stealth.

SAM: (laughs)

MATT: Okay, both of you guys roll stealth.

MARISHA: Panthers have, like, advantage on stealth, something like that?

MATT: They have advantage on stealth check. Yeah.

ORION: You guys are just in further then?

MARISHA: 16. 13. So 16 plus whatever–

MATT: Plus your dex.

LAURA: 15.

MARISHA: – the dex of the panther is.

LAURA: Plus, oh.

MARISHA: No, it's whatever the dex– it's gonna be like–

ORION: Oh.

TALIESIN: (sings) The dex of the panther–

MARISHA: It's gonna be like 20 or something like that.

MATT: All right. You guys move– are you staying on the carpet?

LAURA: No, we're like hopping down off the carpet, and I just want to look around for tracks!

MARISHA: Plus four.

ORION: I take the carpet–

MARISHA: No, plus six.

ORION: – and then I bring it up, while I tell them all that stuff.

MATT: Okay, so you go back down–

LAURA: What! You took our carpet?

ORION: Oh yes, because they need it to get down here as well.

LAURA: Oh, we're going– okay, you guys are joining us. All right.

ORION: I was–

MARISHA: No, we were scouting.

LAURA: I'm just looking for tracks right now, Tiberius.

ORION: Yeah and I followed you, saw what was going on, took your carpet, and I'm giving it back to them.

LAURA: Oh my god.

MATT: So as you guys are–

MARISHA: You can't take our carpet, we're on the carpet.

ORION: Oh, I thought you guys hopped off.

MATT: No, you guys stepped off the carpet, she said, and you transformed, began stealthing in.

MARISHA: Oh, that's right. We did transform. Okay, sure, you can take the carpet.

MATT: As you're doing that you turn around and see Tiberius had rolled the carpet and is currently taking it away.

LAURA: You motherfucker.

MATT: So you guys are on the bottom of this crevasse and Tiberius disappears into the darkness.

Okay, well, go ahead and roll– this would be survival for tracking? Just to get an idea for anything around you see.

LAURA: 16.

MATT: You do see some scratches into the mud of the surface there that lead into a tunnel. You see drag marks, you see footprints, and that's the best you can make out at this in this point in time. But the footprints appear to be dwarven, or dwarf-sized in nature.

MARISHA: Can I do a nature check to see what the scratch marks look like? If they look like any type of beast I might recognize.

MATT: The scratch marks are across the ground, it looks just like fingers being pulled through.

MARISHA: Any type of residue, any type of slime?

MATT: No that you can tell, no.

LAURA: Can we see where the tunnel leads?

MATT: From what you can see, there's no light source in there.

LAURA: We have the light, remember, when I–

MATT: So you take a lantern and put it inside. The tunnel goes back about 25 feet and then stops. It's just a little alcove. You see within the tunnel a series of skeletons or bodies that are partially decomposed.

TALIESIN: Oh. God.

MATT: And you see what looks like a pile of rags in the corner.

TRAVIS: Go check it out.

LAURA: So we can either run or loot. What should we do?

TRAVIS: No, go check it out, ladies.

SAM: They're not gonna find anything.

MARISHA: They're telling us not to be stupid because we don't have support. Should we be stupid?

TRAVIS: Grog says yes.

LAURA: Oh, I'm so scared, but okay, here's the thing, I remember another situation very similar to this.

ORION: It was terrible.

LAURA: And it was the lair of one of those umber hulks.

MARISHA: Right. Why don't we just go back maybe to the entrance of the–

LIAM: Vex'ahlia, what is going on down there?

TRAVIS: No no no no. Be thorough.

(all laugh)

LAURA: Oh brother, I think we found the lair of the umber hulk

TRAVIS: Are you sure?

LAURA: Oh, pretty damn sure.

MATT: It's very– well, the actual tunnel is maybe about five to eight feet across and it would not be able to fit an umber hulk.

LAURA: Oh, really? Can I go along the walls very stealthily and see if I can find any opening, anything else?

MATT: As you step inside and put your hands across the walls–

TALIESIN and LAURA: Oh God. Oh.

MATT: –what you do notice is, the walls are solid. This appears to have been carved out over time. And as you move in, you begin to see the rags, and the pile of rags is less a pile of rags and more some sort of humanoid curled up in on the inside. Unconscious, asleep, or dead. Not moving.

MARISHA: What is she– what do they look like?

MATT: You can't tell from here. It's just like kind of curled over in the corner.

TRAVIS: Go in there.

TALIESIN: I'd like to roll a save against smugness really quickly. Can I save against smugness? I feel a wave of smugness in here.

MATT: I think you might. You're not saved against smugness, Percy.

LAURA: Keyleth, I think you should turn into an eagle. Can she turn into something big enough that can carry me?

MATT: She can. Yeah. A giant eagle, I believe you can.

LAURA: What if you turn into something big enough that it can carry me, I hop on your back and we throw something at it? And then fly away.

(all laugh)

MATT: While you guys are having this conversation, 'cause you're talking to each other–

LAURA: Fuck. We were talking really quietly.

MATT: – the thing in the corner kind of rouses and shoots up out of sudden fear movement, looking about. You see, dressed in rags– you guys are seeing this for the first time, but it's familiar. Smooth head, purplish and blue in color, a series of tentacles in its mouth. A giant scar drawn across one of its eyes, and it looks filthy, and it looks desperate. And just looks at the two of you and you hear a sudden voice in your minds.

LAURA: Oh fuck!

MATT: No movement, just conversation, saying, “What, who are you?”

MARISHA: I drop to my knees and I look at him and just say, it's okay, we're friends.

MATT: He puts up a hand like this and you see there's a flicker of arcane energy and a barrier appears between you and this creature. And just looks.

MARISHA: I take my Druidcraft and I just make a little flower.

LAURA: Oh my God.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: And there's a pretty little tulip and I lay it at the edge of the barrier.

LIAM: (Gollum voice) Nasty.

MATT: Make a persuasion check.

(all laugh)

MATT: With disadvantage.

MARISHA: With disadvantage? Okay. Nine.

MATT: Okay, nine total?

LAURA: Oh no.

MARISHA: I'm not a very charismatic person.

MATT: It holds its place, and the voice again hits your mind and says, “How did you find me? What is your purpose here?”

ORION: I fly back down.

TRAVIS: No, no, no!

LAURA: We don't mean to disturb you, great sire.

MATT: “You will die if you try anything.”

LAURA: We're not going to!

MATT: “I will not fall here, I will not die here.”

LAURA: We mean to help you! We mean to find our way out, and find our friend. That's all.

MARISHA: We don't want to die either.

LAURA: Please. Who did this to you? We can help you.

MARISHA: Let's not die together.

MATT: You can see as you get a better look at it, it definitely has a large scar across part of its face, and it looks to be wearing remnants of a robe similar to what Scanlan was describing. However, it is tattered, it's dirtied, sullied by the elements and god knows what other liquids. It also has this strange kind of metallic skull cap that's currently placed around its head. And it just, “Leave me in peace, then, or give me a reason not to slay you where you stand.”

LIAM: (whispers) Revenge.

LAURA: We can help you get revenge against your brethren who did this to you.

MATT: There's a slight change in mood, you just feel. “Revenge?”

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: Make a persuasion check.

TRAVIS: Roll the shit out of that new dice.

MARISHA: Come on, Vex.

LAURA: 19?

ORION: Yes!

MATT: The barrier flickers and dissipates. It reaches over and grabs what looks like a gnarled stick. Pulls itself up onto its legs, now what looked like a small minuscule creature is now, even in his terrible hunched form, is standing extremely tall, like scraping the top of this maybe eight-foot-tall ceiling in this tunnel.

MARISHA: (meekly) Hi.

MATT: It takes a step forward and says, “Revenge? You speak of revenge. This is a language I wish to know very well.”

MARISHA: You found the right motley crew.

(all laugh)

LAURA: Should we bring it with us?

MARISHA: Would you like to come with us?

LAURA: To leave this cavern?

MARISHA: Meet our friends? We have friends.

MATT: It kind of gives you both a look and you hear this– There's a slight lurching to it as it gives this horrible guttural– (low chuckle) “Friends? That's a word I haven't heard in a long time. Not one I take to heart, but allies, in time, that I can understand. Take me to your allies.”

LAURA: Tiberius?

ORION: Mm, yes?

LAURA: Maybe you can send that fucking carpet back down.

(all laugh)

ORION: I'll be right there, I was trying to get the rest of the party here, but everyone's being buttholes. I fly back down with the carpet.

MATT: You come down with the carpet. At the edge of this opening, you see Keyleth, you see Vex, both emerge with a horrible tentacle-faced gnarled being with a staff coming out with them.

ORION: Hello?

MARISHA: Tiberius–

ORION: Oh, did you make a friend?

MARISHA: We did! See! Friends!

ORION: Wonderful!

MARISHA: This is– What's your name?

MATT: Looks about to you, then looks at Tiberius and says, ignoring your question, “You have persuasion to the arcane.”

ORION: Yes, I'm a sorcerer! I do all kinds of fun things with the arcane!

MATT: “We shall talk.”

ORION: Very good, I'm always willing to learn. Seems you are very powerful.

MATT: “My name… Clarota.”

ALL: Clarota.

MARISHA: Can we call you Clarence for short?

MATT: “No!”

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Okay! Clar-ota

ALL: Clarota.

LIAM: Sounds Spanish.

LAURA: Please, join us on the carpet.

SAM: Can he fit on the carpet?

LIAM: He is very thin.

LAURA: She can fly.

MARISHA: I'll fly.

ORION: The rest of our allies are up.

MATT: He carefully steps on the carpet, once again like its tentacles are (slithering noises).

LAURA: I keep a distance.

MATT: Moving around, its mouth and its eyes are constantly darting, it looks extremely nervous and almost like a cornered animal that's just barely being coaxed onto this journey. You see with each step it takes there a slight flicker of arcane energy at the tip of its fingers, like it's just prepared for anything to go terribly wrong. It steps onto the carpet and goes, “Take me to your allies.”

ORION: Ah yes, we have wonderful allies!

MARISHA: You can even maybe call them friends, even?

LAURA: Not just yet!

MATT: It crosses its legs and sits on the carpet, holding its staff to its chest on the far corner staring at all of you and says, “Go. Now.”

LAURA: Hold on tight.

MATT: You guys make your way up to the top, eventually you see the carpet (whoosh) over the edge of the crevasse, come down to a rest, as your party has now brought with you the stuff of nightmares.

(all laugh)

SAM: That is the thing I saw in the village!

LAURA: Hold on! Hold on!

TRAVIS: What is that? Oh my god!

MATT: At which point, it's leapt off at this point, hovering about and you can see this crackle of fire in its hand and it goes, (panicked noises)

LAURA: No! No!

ORION: I'm standing between them, like, it's okay! These are the allies we speak of!

LAURA: Peace, friends! We are ourselves!

ORION: Grog, don't do anything!

LAURA: We are not controlled.

ORION: Don't use a whip, Scanlan, sing a friendly song as he is our friend– ally. To the guy. Ally. He is– He's in a little spot of trouble and we are going to help him get revenge, or something of the sort.

SAM: He's a friend? Help–

ORION: He prefers–

MATT: “Ally.”

LAURA: Ally.

SAM: Ally.

MARISHA: Ally.

SAM: Ally.

TALIESIN: Ally?

TRAVIS: What's on your head?

MATT: He kind of gives you this keen look of, huh, the least person I expected to ask a question.

(all laugh)

MATT: It kind of hobbles forward with its gnarled staff, and says, “I was cast out from my hive. I was cursed with the mark of the arcane. My people see that as an ill omen. I was discarded, left to die.”

LAURA: Let's destroy your hive.

MATT: “No.”

LAURA: No?

MATT: “You see, the hive is sick. The mind that keeps us safe is no longer its own.”

ORION: Oh?

MATT: “One, an alien one, has come and taken the mind hostage, it has taken my people as its own playthings. I was able to escape its mental grasp.” It reaches up and taps the metal on its head.

LAURA: Oh! Tinfoil hat!

MARISHA and TALIESIN: Magneto helmet!

MARISHA: This is the guy we've needed this whole time!

MATT: “My people will not so easily escape its grasp, they are now under the control of this creature.”

MARISHA: So if we did it–

SAM: If we find this creature, we might be able to free your hive as well.

MATT: “That would be why I wish to have your alliance.”

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: “Help me free our hivemind, free my people.”

TRAVIS: (whispers) Sense motive.

LAURA: Oh yeah, can we sense motive on him?

MATT: (laughs) You definitely can!

LAURA: Oh gosh.

TRAVIS: I would do it, but–

MARISHA: We should also have him help us in your–

MATT: I would put this in a group sense motive right now.

TALIESIN: Yeah! All right!

MATT: Everyone roll!

ORION: I rolled 14.

LAURA: I rolled– what do we add to it?

MATT: Sense motive in this would be your insight, sorry. Pathfinder to Fifth Edition!

LAURA: Insight? 24.

MARISHA: 18?

TRAVIS: 16.

ORION: 14.

TALIESIN: Natural one.

LAURA: (laughs) Four?

LIAM: Four.

TRAVIS: 16!

SAM: 13.

TRAVIS: (happy scream) 16!

(all laugh)

MATT: Okay!

SAM: You're a people person!

MATT: Through your intense grasping this creature's disposition, best you can, as alien and unfamiliar as its mannerisms and speech and interests may be, you get the feeling that it's speaking out of desperation and it's speaking out of genuine interest. You've piqued it with the hint of revenge, you've piqued it with the idea of alliance as opposed to being alone. You get the feeling that it speaks the truth. It genuinely is asking for your help in freeing its people from whatever is influencing their current actions.

LAURA: Clarota… (laughs)

SAM: What's his name?

LAURA: Cla-ro-ta?

MATT: Clarota.

SAM: Can we just call him Clarence?

(all laugh)

LIAM: (Jimmy Stewart voice) Clarence, Clarence!

TALIESIN: Clara. It could be a she.

LAURA: We are very interested in being allies with you. Might we have your word that upon defeating this creature, we will be safe?

SAM: And as a symbol of our dedication to you, I'd love to play you just a little bit of a song that might heal some of those wounds and scrapes that you seem to have all over your body.

MATT: He gives you the dirtiest look you've ever received.

TRAVIS: (whispers) It was because of the arcane!

SAM: It's a pretty good song!

MATT: Make a persuasion check.

(all laugh)

LIAM: Come on, Burt Reynolds!

SAM: Hm. Ooh! 17.

(all laugh)

MATT: He takes a sudden step forward towards you, his tentacles– (slithering noises)

LAURA: Ew, ugh!

MATT: “Play this song.”

TRAVIS: Break out the–

LAURA: It better be good!

SAM: (sings) When I get that feeling, I want Clarota healing. Clarota healing is something that's good for you. Ooh ooh ooh. (sings embellished melisma)

LAURA: Clarota's dancing, I can see it!

MATT: Make a persuasion check– no, a performance check.

SAM: A performance check!

18!

MATT: 18.

(all laugh)

MATT: In spite of itself, it stands there still glaring at you, but out of the corner of your eye you swear you see its toe tapping.

(all laugh)

MATT: It then kind of– its tentacles withdraw in such a way that gets you kind of off-put and the song comes to a halt. “I'd not heard a song. I shall call upon you for more in the future.”

LAURA: Oh!

SAM: There's many more where that came from!

MATT: “Now we talk about how we can kill K'varn.”

LAURA: K'varn!

LAURA and SAM: Yes!

MARISHA: Yes! Let's talk about that.

SAM: End scene!

MATT: And that's where we're going to go ahead and end it for today, guys.

(all cheer)

MATT: That went very interestingly! We'll pick up from that point.

MARISHA: Sorry we had to rebel, you guys.

LAURA: Yeah sorry about that, you guys. Sorry!

MARISHA: Sorry! It was for a good cause!

LIAM: Thank you for rebelling, and staking out on your own!

MATT: You've acquired for the moment a very curious ally. Yeah, this will be an interesting branching point for next week.

LAURA: Oh my gosh.

TRAVIS: We should get some damn hats.

LAURA: I know! We should get him to make us hats!

MARISHA: We definitely need one for Grog. We have to get him to make us hats for Grog.

TRAVIS: Why me?

MATT: (laughs) I hope you guys enjoyed that! No combat. You guys avoided quite a few possibilities for battle and that makes for an interesting dynamic. So well done! You've killed a crap ton of duergar.

LIAM: Trolls.

MATT: And a couple trolls and an ogre, by sending them off a cliff! It was a pretty eventful evening!

MARISHA: Yeah.

MATT: So yeah, so guys, thank you so much forwatching! Also, as a reminder, there is Dwarven Forge that's been doing an amazing kickstarter for its next set. I was a supporter for all of Dwarven Forge's kickstarters and I'm looking forward to being able to break out some of those dungeon tiles in this game in the near future. But if you haven't checked it out yet, I recommend it! Go and see if you can back it. Those guys are awesome, the quality of their work is great! All of you DMs out there that wanna run some seriously legit dungeon setups for your miniatures and battle circumstances, it's highly recommended. So go check that out. I know I've already backed it, so come join me! And (evil voice) one of us, one of us! Anyway, does anyone else have something they wanna talk about for the evening, guys?

ZAC: I do.

MATT: Zac! What's up, buddy?

ZAC: Thanks for tuning in, guys. I wanted to bring up International Tabletop Day.

MATT: Yes! Yes! Let's do that!

ZAC: It's coming up on April 11th. We're going to be live-streaming Tabletop Day from here in this studio. Probably not as complicated a setup as this, but similar of a set up. For those of you that have not registered yet for International Tabletop Day, go to the website tabletopday.com or org, I could be saying it wrong, the chat room will let you know.

MARISHA: Just google it.

ZAC: Google it!

MATT: Angelfire.tabletopday.com

ZAC: I knew you were testing my knowledge! You're saying it wrong, you're saying it wrong. I'm not an actor, dammit! So go check that out. We're still looking for a lot of countries to have representation, so if you're overseas, go to the website, let your local retailers know about it, sign up, and get in on the fun! It's going to be a blast. We're going to have this whole building stacked to the brim with people! Board games, live streaming the whole thing. Get in on it. It's going to be a lot of fun!

MATT: Yeah, do it!

ZAC: So I think that's pretty much it, thanks so much guys.

MATT: Yeah, no worries, I think next week we're gonna try and do a Q&A after the game. So we'll stay for an hour or more after.

ZAC: Subs only!

MATT: Subs only! You get to hang out.

ZAC: Subs only, so if you want to ask questions next week after the show, make sure you subscribe.

MATT: Yes! Do it!

ZAC: Do it. Yeah, that's pretty much it, man.

MATT: Hell yeah, awesome! Well, thanks again, guys, for tuning in to Critical Role. Spread the love, tell your friends about it, all come back and join in the story, and we'll have more fun next week, so. See you next Thursday.

(all cheer)

ZAC: Tune in tomorrow for So You Don't Have To, where Becca and Hector play the worst games they can find so you don't have to. And then Gather your Party, where we play board games with our friends, and it's gonna be a lot of fun.

MATT: Hell yeah.

ZAC: All right, I'm gonna– you guys can talk amongst yourselves, I gotta run. I'm the only person here so I'm gonna run back, turn off the stream. Yeah, yeah, I'm fine.

MATT: (laughs) This guy, this guy. Guys, thanks again, have a wonderful night, we'll see you soon. 

Pre-Show

MATT: Everyone, welcome to the new episode of Critical Role. This evening, we luckily have Ashley Johnson back in as her character Pike. Unfortunately, Laura Bailey will be gone for most of the game, possibly, she might come in, 'cause she's busy recording a show with Wil Wheaton. It's gonna be a great show, but we'll miss her, until she shows up. However, we shall see what the next chapter has in store in just a moment. In the meantime, let's go ahead and get you situated with the character backgrounds.

TRAVIS: Right, listen up! If you have ale, then you have a friend in Grog Strongjaw! A goliath of towering height and size, this barbarian has an appetite for the two great loves in his life: combat, women, and ale!

[record scratch] Wait.

TRAVIS (CONT'D): Easily the brains of the group, Grog is often consulted for his vast knowledge of shapes, colors, and shiny things! Also ale. In his early years, armed with his two-handed greataxe, Grog often enjoyed proving his might amongst the ranks of his family's wandering herd. But after coming upon an unsuspecting elderly gnome in the woods, he objected to the killing of such an innocent life. A creature of impulse, Grog felt only pity for this– well, this terrified little thing. And his disobedience cost him dearly. Beaten bloody, and banished by the herd leader, his Uncle Kevdak, Grog was abandoned and left to die. Exiled from his herd, it was then that the relative of the very gnome he fought to save, saved him. It was the kindness of a gnome cleric named Pike that healed Grog, bringing him back from death's edge. And they have remained close friends ever since. Most nights, Grog can be found challenging entire taverns to wrestling matches! Or accompanying Scanlan to the nearest house where you pay for lady favors. Also ale!

MARISHA: A first impression of Keyleth would leave you with little information on the half-elven druid. You might even think that her social awkwardness due to her sheltered upbringing is kind of sweet. Of course, it would be unwise underestimate her based on first impressions.

[thunder crack]

MARISHA (Cont'd): Under that un-intimidating petite frame is a vicious beast waiting to be unleashed, whose natural powers have made even the fiercest of champions pee their pants, literally! Born to the Air Tribe of the Ashari people, Keyleth was raised with a deep love of nature and the elemental magics. It is her people's inherent duty to protect the delicate areas in Tal'Dorei where the four elemental planes begin to bleed with this realm. Since she was a little girl, she had quite a knack for air manipulation and beast shaping abilities. Well, if you consider kittens and flying squirrels to be little beasts...which, I do. Anyways, it wasn't long before the headmaster of the tribe, her father, Korrin, realized her true prodigious abilities and she was inveterated to succeed him as the next headmaster. Just like that, her jovial childhood was stripped and replaced with endless spell memorization, teachings from ancient traditions, and exceedingly high expectations. Every druid leader-to-be must embark on a journey to seek out the sister tribes in order to introduce and establish respect amongst the fellow headmasters. They call this the Aramente, or Noble Odyssey. When her father felt she was ready, he set her on the path to truly discovering herself, not knowing when, or if, she will ever return. As she hiked down the mountain towards Stilben, she meditated on the task ahead. Part of the Aramente is proving yourself a strong warrior, a valiant protector, and a wise and compassionate leader. With this knowledge, one thought plays in repeat in her mind: Is she even worthy?

TALIESIN: Percy was the third child of seven children, born to a noble family who lived far to the north in the ancient castle of Whitestone. With so many siblings to share the burdens of lordship, Percy turned his attention to the sciences, engineering, and naturalism. One day, a mysterious couple, named Lord and Lady Briarwood, came to court. During a feast held in their honor, the Briarwoods violently took control of the castle, killing or imprisoning everyone who would stand in their way. Percy awoke chained in the dungeon, only to be freed by his younger sister. Together they fled, chased by the Briarwoods' men. As they ran, Percy's sister took several arrows to the chest and fell. Percy kept running, eventually jumping into a freezing river and floating unconscious to freedom. He did not remember waking up on a fishing boat. He barely remembered the next two years, as he slowly made his way as far south as possible. Then one night, Percy had a dream: a roaring cloud of smoke offered him vengeance against those who destroyed his family. When he awoke, Percy began to design his first gun.

SAM: Oh, you haven't heard of Scanlan Shorthalt? Well, gird your loins, ladies, because he has his eye on you. A talented musician, master of disguise, and dashingly handsome in his own mind, Scanlan sings songs almost as much as he sings his own praises. Born a poor gnome, Scanlan used his endless charm and soaring tenor voice to croon for coin and support his single mother. One day, he was discovered by a half-orc promoter, and joined Dr. Dranzel's Spectacular Traveling Troupe where he learned the ways of the world, and honed his skills as a bard extraordinaire. A loner much of his life, Scanlan has never quite come to terms with the violent death of his mother at the hands of a goblin invasion. While his years on the road provided many, shall we say, educational experiences with the opposite sex, deep down Scanlan yearns for the one thing he's never known: the true love of a fellow gnome. Still, Scanlan considers himself a lover first, performer second, and fighter distant third. On the battlefield, he'll support his allies, but rarely draws blood, unless it's to protect fellow gnome, Pike. Count on Scanlan for a hearty laugh, a rollicking song, and a twinkle in his eye that melts hearts and makes the females swoon.

ORION: Greetings and salutations, I am Tiberius Stormwind. I hail from a town called Tyriex, located in the heart of Draconia. Born from a politically respected family, at the age of 15, I succeeded in passing the Sorcerer's Rite, showing prodigy-like control of my magic. The judges and the Draconian high council were amazed at how powerful my spells were for how long I had been training. At 20 years old, I was the youngest appointed member of the magic guild in Draconian history. For the next few years, I almost went mad from the malaise of being a guild member, as it's rather boring. However, one day I happened upon a chamber, unused for quite some time. In the room were stacks of books and maps of the surrounding cities and areas around the known world. For months, I would frequent the chamber, and learned of artifacts from legend. After a long period of research, I made a list of artifacts that caught my eye. I brought these findings to the high council and was told that all of the information in the chamber I had stumbled upon was either believed to be fiction, or unsolvable mysteries, and hence were lost forever. I found those answers to be unacceptable. A year later, I devised a ruse and managed to convince the city council to lend support in me leaving Draconia on a mission of peace and diplomacy for the surrounding kingdoms. Going from town to town and making friends and allies in and for the name of Draconia. Being a red dragonborn, I had quite the task on my hands in that respect, but it was exactly what I needed so I could explore the world and find these artifacts, as I felt the truth was out there. Some may describe me as buffoonish, but I say poppycock to all that. I am much sharper than most give me credit for. I just don't pay attention to things sometimes. I've also been known to be rather cunning, loyal, happy-go-lucky, and well, dangerous. I can't help but show my true scales every now and then. But overall, I think I'm quite friendly for a dragonborn.

LIAM: Never entirely welcome in the company of elves or men, Vax'ildan learned at a young age to skip past formality, preferring instead to invite himself in your door. Along with twin sister, Vex'ahlia, Vax was born by a chance encounter between elven royalty and human peasantry. Raised by their mother in their early years, the twins were eventually sent off to their father in the elven capital of Syngorn. But their cool reception among the elves there never warmed, and their time in the capital didn't last. The siblings stole away one autumn night and set out on the open road. After a few years of wandering, they eventually decided to return to their mother, and journeyed back to the lands of their youth. But instead of finding their childhood home, they returned to a pile of rubble. Their mother was gone, their home burned to ash. Pressing the townspeople for answers, they learned of the day the dragon came. With their ties all severed, Vax'ildan and his sister set out to find their fortune together in Tal'Dorei. An outsider since birth, Vax quickly learned to solve life's challenges in his own particular way, often by sidestepping them entirely. And when his knack for circumventing adversity isn't enough, the way of blades the elves schooled him in more than makes up the difference.

LAURA: Like so many half-elves, Vex'ahlia has spent most of her life suffering the cool reception of a people who don't fully accept her. Born of a human mother, and an elven father who only later in life took an interest in their existence, Vex'ahlia and her twin brother, Vax'ildan, quickly realized the only people they could truly rely on in this world were each other. It was at the age of ten when the two were taken from their mother, and brought to live in Syngorn, the isolated elven city for which their father was an ambassador. He quietly took them in, but always kept an icy distance, and after too many years of disdainful looks, the pair decided to leave his indifference behind, and set out on their own. Vax took to the cities, stealing small trinkets and learning the ways of the thief, while Vex kept to the woods. She preferred the isolation. Always the keen observer, she learned to hunt and to track, to spy and to shoot. Through a series of fateful events, earned herself a companion in the form of a bear– her own stolen Trinket – to fight alongside her and protect her fiercely. Also, he is adorable, and gives expert massages.


MATT: Welcome back. Unfortunately, we don't have Pike's video ready yet. I'm working on it.

ASHLEY: My bad.

MATT: This week got away from me, and Ashley got it to me a little late, but we'll have it up next week, don't worry. However we are happy to have Ashley with us.

(all cheer)

MATT (CONT'D): She's come down from her BAFTA cloud. (all laugh) Which is amazing, congratulations again.

ASHLEY: Thank you guys.

MATT: So yeah, as a heads up too, if you wanna do any quick announcements real fast, I think you had an announcement you wanted to make.

ASHLEY: It's my mom's birthday today.

(all cheer)

MATT: Happy birthday Ashley's mom, yay!

ASHLEY: Her name's Nancy.

LIAM: Hi Nancy.

TRAVIS: Happy birthday, Nancy. Totally watching this right now.

MARISHA: Is she watching?

ASHLEY: She probably is.

(all laugh)

MATT: Well, hello! Also for those who are Hearthstone players, the new Black Hawk Mountain Expansion came out today, in which I voice Nefarian and Ragnaros.

(all cheer)

MATT (CONT'D): My vanilla-WoW-playing self from back in the day is nerding out over that, so enjoy that. Anyone have anything else they wanna announce or talk about? Are we good to start?

SAM: Hi, mom!

MARISHA: Hi, mom.

MATT: All righty.

TRAVIS: I don't think my mom knows what the internet is.

ORION: Related, I leveled my undead holy priest to 64 last night, on Warcraft.

ZAC: We're just about a thousand happy–

MATT: Congrats. Way to go, level 64. So you're just barely into burning crusade, good man.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: I got one too. My brother who also works in video games gave a talk at GVC this year, and it just went online, and not now but later you should watch Alex Jaffe's talk on metagame balancing. It's really really fun, it's fabulous, and you learn a lot.

MATT: There you go, Alex Jaffe, look it up.

MARISHA: Alex is brilliant.
Part I

MATT: All right guys, so, getting to the game at hand. So little overview for the story, the party has been sent to the city of Kraghammer, through a friend of theirs named Arcanist Allura Vysoren. A good friend of hers and a folk hero throughout the land known as Lady Kima of Vord, who's the halfling paladin of Bahamut, has gone missing. She went on a vision quest as part of a pilgrimage she's been on for the past year, and sensed a dark evil brewing far beneath the city of Kraghammer. Disappeared into the city and hasn't been seen for weeks. So Arcanist Allura asked the party, hired them essentially, to go and see her whereabouts. Upon getting to Kraghammer, they interacted with some of the local characters, eventually found theirself talking to Lord Nostoc Greyspine, who owns the mines at the very bottom of Kraghammer proper. After a brief encounter with a mutated abomination of a Naga creature, they were then hired by lord Nostoc to go into the mines, find whatever's creating these abominations, destroy whatever is the source of them, and he will pay well and also pay for each creature head that is brought to him individually. After getting into the mines, a few battles ensue with some of the local denizens, couple of the umber hulks, that were turned into snails, and other interesting circumstances. The party then found what looked to be an entirely abandoned goblin city, and a series of goblinoid corpses, many of which had bored holes in their skull in various states of decay. They found a long bridge across an open chasm. Upon traversing it, Scanlan went invisible, and found what looked like a duergar war camp, which are like ashy-skinned, evil dwarves that live deep underground. Watched a dwarf get executed by what appeared to be some sort of strange alienoid creature, that was revealed to be an illithid, or a mind flayer. A being that is psychic and consumes brains.

ASHLEY: Brains!

MATT: Upon returning, the party had a plan to lead them off of a illusionary cliff, that went pretty well. Ended up taking out a significant portion of the charging army at the time. Vax here, however, got stunned on the way across by the one mind flayer, nearly fell, however was saved by Tiberius at the last moment. Nearly lost their magic carpet, but it was retrieved.

ASHLEY: Wait, you still have the magic carpet, right?

MATT: Yeah, it got recovered. Barely.

MARISHA: We got it back, it's okay.

TRAVIS: Not thanks to some.

MATT: (laughs) After brief discussion, Keyleth and Vex decided they didn't want to listen to anyone's bullshit, and hijacked the magic carpet, flew down into the chasm below, and discovered behind one of the underground waterfalls some sort of a mind flayer who was cast out from the society, covered in rags, kind of a twisted physical form, and after a very tense discussion seemed to befriend it under the guise of mutually agreed retribution against those that are oppressive to this whole chasm area.

MARISHA: Clarence.

LIAM and SAM: Clarota.

MATT: Clarota. I don't think he'll take kindly to Clarence. However, this is where we left off the previous game.

ASHLEY: So nervous.

MATT: As you guys have gathered up, and you've finished your luxurious song to try and ease his torn form, he finishes tapping his toe in spite of himself. Looks about the rest of the group and says, once again, not vocally, but speaking directly into your mind, through a horrifying whispered voice that you cannot even close your ears to get rid of, “I think it's best we rest out of sight.” He points across the chasm, to the war camp that is looming across the way. He begins to dart off towards the abandoned goblinoid village.

ORION: I guess we should follow him, then.

SAM: Yes, that's wise.

TALIESIN: I think that's a great idea.

SAM: We follow.

TALIESIN: No, nothing can be there.

MATT: As you guys make your way in toward the goblinoid village, you can see Clarota who is genuinely hovering about a foot off the ground, and kind of just coasting around in a very creepy way. Finds one tent, opens up and looks inside, “Here, here we can talk.” Darts inside.

TRAVIS: We follow.

SAM: We do follow, yes.

MATT: As you're following–

TRAVIS: Oh crap.

SAM: Oh God, we're dead.

TRAVIS: Why? Why would he touch his dice? We're gonna die!

MATT: As you're following towards the center of this town, you, see in the distance, a small light moving, back from the direction where you first saw that duergar camp, where Grog was assaulted.

TRAVIS: I don't recall that.

LIAM: Look back the way we came, there's some sort of light up ahead.

ORION: That can't be good.

LIAM: Stay with Clarota, I'm gonna go take a look, Scanlan, come on.

SAM: I'm coming with.

MATT: Both of you guys roll stealth.

TRAVIS: I'll stay outside the tent if somebody wants to ask him how to get a Magneto helmet like his.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS (CONT'D): 'Cause I'm gonna need that.

ORION: I'll talk to him.

SAM: It's just a roll? Not great. Nine!

LIAM: 29.

TALIESIN: That's a number.

MATT: So, as you officially vanish into the ether and surrounding darkness, Scanlan, who still has that song stuck in his head from earlier, his slow jam is just…

(laughs)

MATT (CONT'D): Abstractedly humming to himself without realizing, and calling a little bit of attention, at which point you began to hear some footsteps in the distance that come to an immediate halt.

LIAM: Grab Scanlan, put my hand over his mouth, and say, Quiet, man, what's wrong with you?

SAM: It's a nervous habit! I'm sorry!

(all laugh)

LIAM: With great power comes great responsibility, shut up!

SAM: It's a gift I have to share with the world!

LIAM: Later, later. Save it for the mind flayer. So with him tucked under my arm like a football, I start to creep further. And try to make out– if there's light from the lantern, I can see in dim light, thanks to daddy's blood, so. I'm gonna try to figure out what it is exactly that I'm seeing.

MATT: Go ahead and make a perception check.

SAM: I also have low light vision.

MATT: You can make perception check with disadvantage, because you're under his arm.

LIAM: Perception check? Oh.

SAM: Nope.

LIAM: Do I have any advantage on that?

MATT: No.

LIAM: 11.

MATT: All right. Actually, directly looking in the direction of that duergar camp earlier, you can see behind a pillar that's blocking your view, it's obstructing your view of the actual camp proper, you can see some movement in the light. You hear some shuffling, it sounds like plate. You hear a voice just kind of muttering to itself. A familiar, female gnomish voice.

LIAM: Pike?

ASHLEY: Hey guys!

(all laugh)

ASHLEY (CONT'D): It's me, Pike!

LIAM: Jeez, where have you been?

ASHLEY: Oh man, I've had quite a time. I've missed you guys terribly. A lot has happened. I'm sure for you guys as well.

SAM: Not so much.

ORION: I say into my thing, “Scanlan, what the hell's going on?”

SAM: Don't worry, it's a friend, we'll bring her back soon.

ORION: Okay, well, there's a mind flayer here.

SAM: Keep him busy. He likes slow jams.

ORION: Right, right.

MATT: As you guys take a look at Pike, you notice she's fully armored, but dirty, she's got sweat across her face, looks like she may have had a couple scuffles on the way through here.

ASHLEY: I did.

MATT: She's got a wild look to her eyes.

SAM: Oh my God.

MATT: Genuinely relieved to see you. Pike, you've managed to come down here through the front of the mines, which for the most part have been clear. You follow what details you can after asking around and discovering that the rest of your party had ventured below without you. You've followed the tracks best you can, and are glad that you at least chose the right path and ran into them before you ran into something far more dangerous. What you were inspecting was this campsite that appeared to have been abandoned. What caught your eye was against the stone wall right above the ring of stones that form the fire itself, there is a giant symbol carved into the stone that is a protective sigil of Bahamut, the platinum dragon, which is a religious symbol of protection, used in different divine rituals.

LIAM: We were looking at that, we couldn't make heads or tails of it. You ever seen that before?

ASHLEY: No.

(all laugh)

MATT: Go ahead and make a religion check.

LIAM: Are you sure? Think about it, just for a moment longer.

ASHLEY: Well give me, actually, let me rethink on this. I think maybe–

MARISHA: So wait, are we all reunited?

LIAM: Oh, it's a natural 20!

MARISHA: Oh, welcome back Pike!

TRAVIS: The first roll.

MARISHA: Are we all reunited?

LIAM: You just forgot.

ASHLEY: I just– you know what? Actually, now that I'm thinking about it.

(all laugh)

MATT: You clutch your holy symbol instinctually as you reach up and run your fingers along the stonework, tracing the carving across the stone. As you do, your eyes close, and you feel the warmth of Sarenrae's presence fill your mind for a second, and for a split moment, you can see a well-armored, very driven, female halfling with hair pulled back into tight brown braids, a dark green cloak thrown over one shoulder, who's currently carving that symbol into the stone. You're seeing Lady Kima of Vord, the one who left this symbol, to protect her campsite as she made up camp here. You don't know how long ago this transpired, but this was definitely left by her in this tunnel.

LIAM: What is it?

ASHLEY: It was left by a woman.

SAM: Lady Kima, the one we're trying to find?

ASHLEY: Yes, Lady Kima.

LIAM: How did you know that?

SAM: Me and Pike are like–

TRAVIS: Oh, Jesus.

SAM: It's so great to see you, you look fantastic by the way.

ASHLEY: I don't feel fantastic.

SAM: Bring it in, bring it in, give me a hug. Ooh, you smell a little. I like it though. Somehow it works on you.

LIAM: We're in a very complicated situation, a lot has happened to us. We found sort of a war camp down here, and there is sort of a being, I don't know what to call it. He's got a little of this going on, and he speaks and lashes out through his mind. We fought a huge force down here, and then we ended up falling into a cavern, and then Keyleth and my sister found another one, what are they called? They're called– illithids.

SAM: Yes, yes. And we found a rogue one, and we may team up with him– or her?– to go back and get revenge and maybe kick some ass in the camp.

LIAM: This just happened. He seems extremely dangerous, however, the forces we faced in the other illithid seem maybe worse. So that's where we're at.

SAM: So welcome back. Great, sounds like a fun time. Let's rejoin our friends, shall we?

ASHLEY: Let's go kick some ass.

SAM: So we trot back over to the dead goblin village.

MATT: All right, you make your way back to the tent that was originally scouted out. The rest of the party's there waiting as Clarota is awkwardly sitting in the far end, just looking out as all of you slowly approach and enter the tent. Not speaking, just reactionary, and keeping a watch on all of you.

ORION: I turn to Clarota, I'm like, “Ooh, that's our friend, Pike. She's a good ally. Hello, Pike!”

ASHLEY: Hello everybody.

ALL: (gasp) Pike!

ORION: Sometimes we hug as allies, Clarota.

MARISHA: Where have you been?

ASHLEY: Well, I had quite a time. When we were up on the tower, I noticed something, and I felt… I had to leave, because I started to have a vision.

ORION: Oh, those are fun.

ASHLEY: I feel like I should talk to you guys about this later, just because–

SAM: It's personal?

ASHLEY: What is your name? I'm so sorry. I'm Pike, it's very nice to meet you.

MATT: You get a better look as you approach this entity. You see what looks like a very tall, thin, gaunt-looking humanoid with a hood over the head as you approach. You get a better look at the facial features. Smooth, kind of dull, bluish-purple skin. These sunken, creepy, yellowish green eyes, and instead of where a mouth or nose would be, you see four slightly twitching tentacles. Barely obscuring what looks like a round lamprey-like toothed maw.

LIAM: Pike, this is Clarota. We've just met.

ASHLEY: Can I shake his hand?

MATT: Do you wanna reach your hand out?

ASHLEY: Yes.

MATT: There is no physical response, the hand is not extended, but you hear, in the middle of your mind, at full volume, a creepy whispered voice go, “Are you to be one of our allies as well?”

ASHLEY: Yes. Of course.

MATT: “Very well, she may stay.”

ORION: Thank you very much, Clarota.

ASHLEY: I take my hand and scratch the back of my head.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: I take Pike and I kind of pull her out of the tent really quick, and I'm like–

SAM: Girl talk.

MARISHA: Okay he's like a mind flayer, and we found him in a hole under a waterfall, but he's cool, but he wants vengeance.

ASHLEY: Is that– the thing is covering, so he can't be–

MARISHA: He's like outcast, yeah. But he's gonna help us fight all of his tribe who hates us.

LIAM: Clarota.

ASHLEY: Do we know for sure he's helping us?

ORION: Yes.

MARISHA: Yeah.

LIAM: Can you help us understand your kind? Your history? How you've come to be here and who this individual is that is fucking with your shit?

(all laugh)

MATT: Proverbial statement, I like that. At which point Clarota's eyes narrow, and you can feel just the general mood and energy of the inside of the tent grows dark. It grows mildly tense. Suddenly you feel this presence, a voice once again, fill your mind as Clarota says, “Seven years since I discovered my curse. My form was struck with the brand of the Arcane. And these foul arts proved difficult to conceal. My brethren could sense my impurity, my deviation, and cast me out. I was severed from the Elder Brain. And chased on threat of death, should I return. I wandered these tunnels in squalor, feeding on what paltry filth I could ensnare, and fleeing from the ones I could not face alone. In my wandering, I discovered a duergar stronghold, with a magma pool, and it proved to be a decent source of sustenance for some time. Paying off the occasional straggler. Suddenly a great battle took place. It appeared something had sieged the stronghold. Reading the surface thoughts of the deep dwarves I encountered in the following weeks, I found a shift of power. Whatever had taken this hold had now demanded fealty of them. And they accepted when faced with annihilation. This entity that took the duergar by force, they called K'varn. I caught no sight of it. But the fear I could sense, from within these doors were so primal, so great, that I knew to keep a distance to be safe. But four months ago one of my estranged people, was captured by these ash-skins, and brought within the obsidian walls, for what I assumed was interrogation. Long after, the bulk of the Duergar people marched in packs through the long, deep tunnels that led to my people's colony and attacked. Strangely, before much bloodshed could occur, which I only assume was the next step in this onslaught, the fighting stopped. And the colony allowed the ash skins to waltz directly into the temple, unharmed, unchallenged, where our Elder Brain resides. It wasn't until after discovered whoever this K'varn is, they themselves infiltrated the temple, and somehow took the Elder Brain under their own control. I watched as my people had their will robbed of them. And they took the will of all the others that lived and breathed in these tunnels. Now, a terrible army is forged of both factions. And they walk under the banner of this K'varn. Since this, I've fled back to the higher tunnels, and scrounged for materials so I could shield myself from the iron grip influence of the now enslaved Elder Brain. It took me weeks. But I'm confident I'm safe from its influence. For now.”

TALIESIN: Is that the thing that you wear upon your head?

MATT: As it pulls the hood back, you see once again this kind of haphazard, metallic cluster of patches of metal, and iron, this dull kind of blue metallish glow, that you can only now see once he's sitting in near pitch darkness. As he reaches up and runs his finger along it, “Yes. This I feel can protect me. But I think…I think there is a way to change the tides of this circumstance, I feel that if I could somehow free my people from the influence of K'varn, release its hold on the hive mind, my people would allow me to rejoin the colony. To be one again with my family. My brethren.”

LIAM: I have a few questions. Is that all right?

MATT: “Yes.”

LIAM: You and your brethren, without this, do you think as one?

MATT: “We think as individuals, but the hive mind connects us all. The hive mind gives us knowledge, history, direction. It is the source of our family.”

LIAM: So, one individual of your family sees something, the entire hive sees the same, is that correct?

MATT: “Yes.”

ORION: Oh dear, that's no good.

(all laugh)

LIAM: And you mentioned the Arcane being a stigma upon you?

MATT: At which point it turns its gaze away, and slinks down into its form slightly.

LIAM: What do your brethren put their faith in, if not the Arcane?

MATT: “They put their faith in the arts of the mind. Both understanding, manipulating, controlling, and devouring.”

ORION: Clarota, we've already allied ourselves with you, as we've already agreed.

MATT: “You'll help me free my people? To be family again, to belong.”

ORION: As we said, yes. But the thing you wear on your head, it would make us all the more equipped to take on this task. It's against such powerful mind creatures, such as yourself, I know my way around a couple Arcane things, but nothing of the mind control sorts. If someone like me were to be influenced, it would be very bad for our group. Even yourself, perhaps. It would do well to at least maybe show us how you built it, and– You get what I'm getting at, right?

TRAVIS: I would like a steel beanie as well.

ASHLEY: Basically, where do we get one of those?

MATT: “It would take weeks to build another.”

TRAVIS: Weeks?

TALIESIN: I would like to take a look into it if possible, and see if it makes sense. I am a builder.

MARISHA: Maybe we can figure out something a little bit more jerry-rigged.

TALIESIN: If we were all hidden, we would have a distinct advantage.

TRAVIS: I have a very large bronze pot in the bag of holding. Could I wear that on me noggin?

TALIESIN: If you like.

MATT: It gives you a look in response and says, "This protects me from the influence of the hive mind, my preexisting connection.”

TALIESIN: Could we be hidden from them? Would there be a way to cloak ourselves from their understanding?

MATT: “Stay hidden from the others. Their sight is the mind's sight. The Elder Brain is a collection of the once living mind flayers of my people.”

LIAM: I have one more question, and we have allied ourselves to you, that's true. But I'm curious to know, hopefully our goals intertwine, and we want the same thing. But once that is achieved, and it will be, what happens then for the Illithid? Do you return to your home below? Do your people harbor any ambition to move upward into Kraghammer?

MATT: It looks to the side and says, “Our ambition is to pursue the continuation of our knowledge-seeking. We have no interest in the surface. We only wish to spread our dominion here below. Expand our great city of Yug'Voril.”

LIAM: I'm sorry, what was that name?

MATT: “Yug'Voril.”

ORION: Sounds like a lovely town, Yug'Voril.

MATT: “It's beautiful.”

TALIESIN: I feel that we could come to an arrangement.

LIAM: I do as well.

TALIESIN: We would require of you, at the very least, safe passage once we have helped you reunite with your people, for ourselves, and for a friend of ours who's lost in the darkness, who we are here to retrieve.

MATT: “For this deed, of freeing my people from this insidious presence that is K'varn…”

TALIESIN: Freeing all of our people.

MATT: “I believe this could be arranged.”

LIAM: Scanlan, does he speak true?

SAM: Uh. Let's find out.

(all laugh)

SAM (CONT'D): I'm gonna just see if I can detect any lies.

MATT: Go ahead and make an insight check.

SAM: What am I adding to this?

LIAM: Insight.

SAM: Oh. 13. I'm not an insight person.

ASHLEY: Oh, can I–

TRAVIS: (scoffs)

LIAM: 20 over here!

TALIESIN: What are you doing?

TRAVIS: She's rolled twice.

ASHLEY: Assisting, assisting.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: All of your 20's, running out.

MATT: It's too late for the assist, unfortunately, 'cause it's already rolled.

LIAM: But can she suss him out?

MATT: Best you can tell, those who are looking into it, he seems to be speaking from a point of desperation, and intent, as he has no other option. He is genuinely– You can see it in the way he talks, and the way he speaks about his family. He's a little crazy. The isolation has put him to a point where he wants to return to his people, and will do whatever it takes to get back with them, however, he also seems to be, in a weird way that you can read, appreciative that you're willing to help, and seems to be, on his part, genuine. As a note, music's not playing? I don't know if there's a reason for that.

TRAVIS: Did he say his eyes, the flayer's eyes, are what put people in trances, or their minds?

SAM: Yeah, the eyes, the eyes.

TRAVIS: So if we wear helmets, it's not gonna help us.

SAM: No, the helmet is what separates him from his hive mind. It wouldn't help us at all.

TRAVIS: I'll still wear the big bronze pot on my head.

MATT: You put the pot on your head. It's clunky.

TRAVIS: On my whole head.

MATT: You cannot see with the pot on your head.

TRAVIS: No, but I'm protected from the flayer.

SAM: Can you bore two like, ghost holes in?

TRAVIS: I don't need it, I have incredible warrior skills.

TALIESIN: Do their powers work with reflection?

MATT: “No, they can peer into your very mind.”

TALIESIN: But if we approach them using a reflective surface to view them, can they peer into our minds through a reflected surface?

MATT: “If they know you're there, you're in sight, they can read into you.”

TRAVIS: Shit.

MARISHA: They can read our minds.

MATT: “If you are obscured, unknown to them, then you are hidden. They cannot sense you, but if they know you are there, they can peer, they can pry.”

LIAM: Is there any way to be hidden for us?

MATT: “Hidden from sight. Be hidden from knowledge. Be hidden from them.”

MARISHA: Clarence? Sorry, Clarota.

SAM: How about Clay?

MATT: “Clarota!”

TRAVIS: Jesus.

MARISHA: Sorry, Clarota. I just have one quick question. Why would you want to rejoin your colony after they've banished you? Why not leave?

MATT: “I have nowhere to go. They are my essence, my connection. I long to return. It is the way of my people, I understand this curse I hold. I spite myself, I look upon this disease, and spit. But perhaps, with this deed, they can overlook it.”

MARISHA: You're not diseased, you're special.

TRAVIS: Oh, God.

SAM: Question, Clarota.

MATT: “You know nothing of my culture. You presume too much.”

LIAM: I think we do understand your desires though, and we can align ours with yours. So let us speak of specifics, Clarota.

SAM: Strategy.

LIAM: Strategy.

SAM: Number one, that assortment of dwarves and some of your friends and ogres over there on the other side of the chasm. Is that something that we need to face headlong, or can we maybe surpass them, trying to find K'varn, or this temple that you speak of?

MATT: “We may if you wish. Their stronghold is far below. The magma leads the way. However, if I know what I've seen, the general resides in that camp. I know no way within the stronghold, without the brunt of their army. Perhaps the general can be pried for information. If you bring him to me.”

SAM: “Bring him,” so you won't be accompanying us on any adventure, or…?

MATT: “I will be coming.”

ORION: We have to fetch him.

SAM: And the general is in that…

ORION: Where you were, right?

SAM: Yes, yes. So we have to go over.

ASHLEY: Did you say something about a temple, or did I completely misunderstand?

MATT: “There is a temple in our city. Where my people reside, that is where the Elder Brain sits.”

SAM: We'll get there eventually, but first step is this smaller force across the chasm.

TRAVIS: Yeah, we're gonna put the beat down.

(all laugh)

ORION: Well said, Grog.

MARISHA: You said there was a big army front, guarding this general? Of duergar?

SAM: Well, the general's right across the chasm.

MARISHA: Oh, he's just right across the way?

MATT: “Their forces are gathering there. The bulk of their army currently is divided between that and the stronghold below.”

LIAM: Percy shot this one, I think.

TALIESIN: I did.

LIAM: I think it's important to point out that your kin, this general, is aware of at least three of us, of my dragonborn friend, the singer over here, and myself.

SAM: I don't think he knows about me.

TRAVIS: No, you were invisible.

LIAM: Just us, then.

ORION: I don't even know if he saw me. He saw my funny cards.

LIAM: True, it could be just me then.

ORION: Oh, I cast Prestidigitation on Pike and I clean her up real quick.

LIAM: You look lovely. How do you think your kin will react to that? What will their response be if they know that outsiders have come? If they've seen just me at this moment, plus a few illusions.

MATT: “They will be prepared. So you must find another way in. You must think how to not be seen.”

TRAVIS: Think.

(all laugh)

ORION: Don't worry, Grog.

MATT: You've never ever, in your life, ever heard someone else chuckle inside your brain, but you hear within the center of yours: (chuckles) “Think, yes.”

TRAVIS: Oh ho, it echoes in the pot.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS (CONT'D): But I start laughing to myself.

(silly laughter)

LIAM: Can I assume that you would have already given us any advice by now if you knew a way? Are we stuck with our own resources?

MATT: “I've only watched from a distance. Getting too close was too dangerous. I only read surface thoughts. If I were seen, I would be nothing, I would be destroyed.”

LIAM: So no back doors, no secret entrances that you know of, into the camp, anywhere near this general?

MATT: “None.”

LIAM: Fuck.

TRAVIS: What's in the bottom of the crevasse?

SAM: It's water and magma.

TRAVIS: Can we pick up the little loch ness monster and throw it at him or something?

SAM: Oh yes, down below, in the waters, our allies - Vex, and uh, somebody.

(all laugh)

SAM (CONT'D): Found some creatures under the water, snatching bodies as they fell. Keyleth. Yes, I forgot who went.

ORION: Her majesty, Keyleth.

SAM: Pike's beauty distracted me, you shouldn't have cleaned her up so nice.

ORION: I'm sorry.

SAM: Anyway, there were some creatures down below in the waters, are those anything that we could use, or should we just avoid them?

MATT: You see it actually hisses for a second, as soon as you mention this he goes, “No, avoid. That creature is older than all of us. It resides there, an ancient mind. One that should be kept at bay. An aboleth.”

SAM: Do you need a lozenge?

(all laugh)

MATT: Its eyes narrow once again, not quite understanding the words you use, seemingly amused.

SAM: It's a gnome thing.

MATT: As a brief aside, too, I checked the connection on my iPad, I'm playing music fine, and the connection's in the iPad, I don't quite know where it's losing its connection. But I think we need some music.

SAM: All right, so let's review our options, shall we?

TRAVIS: We're gonna charge in there.

SAM: We can't charge, there's a chasm.

LIAM: How did that go with the little brain thing? Not too well.

TALIESIN: The chasm is a problem.

SAM: Master switch.

MARISHA: An entire colony of mind flayers.

SAM: We could fly in, right?

LIAM: The bridge is gone, we have to–

SAM: We can fly in death from above.

TRAVIS: I don't know if I can.

SAM: Well, we can figure out a way. Enough of us can turn into flying things to get you there.

TALIESIN: We also have a flying carpet. We can repair the bridge if we had to, at least put a rope across.

ASHLEY: I think–

SAM: Or we could disguise ourselves somehow.

ASHLEY: I think I know where we need to go.

SAM: What?

TRAVIS: Really?

MARISHA: Really?

LIAM: Get out of this city.

MARISHA: Please, do tell.

SAM: So, hold on–

(static)

(music)

MATT: There we go.

SAM: There's music.

ASHLEY: Oh wait, I think I read this wrong.

(all laugh)

SAM: Pike, don't toy with our emotions.

TRAVIS: You just got back.

ASHLEY: So you guys haven't gone to the war camp.

SAM: We have.

ASHLEY: You have.

SAM: We been there and we quickly retreated.

LIAM: Scanlan took a poke about. He boofed himself out of sight and had a look around, and then we returned to the edge of it, and I kind of flipped the bird at them, and taunted them a little, but most of us haven't been in.

ASHLEY: Have you been to the lake?

TRAVIS: None of us went in the water.

SAM: Lake? No, there's no– what, there's a lake?

ASHLEY: Isn't that where that thing is?

TRAVIS: The bottom of the crevasse, right?

LIAM: Under the bridge, there was–

SAM: No, that's rushing water, that's not–

MATT: The area after the big drop that was at the bottom, there was a lake of water. And there was a waterfall coming out of the natural–

LIAM: And the ogres were getting sucked under by something.

TRAVIS: So we didn't go down there.

MARISHA: Is there something under the lake?

ASHLEY: Well I just– I don't know if I should be talking about this in front of him.

TRAVIS: We could go away from him for a second.

LIAM: He will probably hear the thoughts inside your mind.

ORION: Clarota is totally fine to talk in front of. He's amazing.

ASHLEY: Earmuffs.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY (CONT'D): Well, shall I share a vision I had?

LIAM: I think so, Pike. I think at this point, we should just move forward.

ASHLEY: In this vision that I had, I was pulled down toward the mines. Into the tunnels, below where the dwarves were working.

MARISHA: Through the lake?

ASHLEY: Well, past the goblinoid creatures, and past a great underground lake. Past a jagged onyx colored fortress, framed in molten rock.

TRAVIS: We haven't been there yet.

ASHLEY: Past a field of broken glass and bone. Have you seen any of this?

TALIESIN and MARISHA: No.

TRAVIS: I don't think an onyx fortress.

ORION: Those last things sound terrible.

LIAM: Yes, that all sounds shitty.

(all laugh)

LIAM (CONT'D): The last thing we've seen is the lake, and we didn't go too close to it, because a couple of ogres fell in from above, and they disappeared like something grabbed them.

TRAVIS: We didn't have him fly down there and get a close look.

LIAM: No, we haven't had a look around.

ASHLEY: I wonder if there's like–

MARISHA: I can cast Water Breathing on all of us.

TRAVIS: Why don't we send one, like Mars Rover over here, and have him go check it out?

MARISHA: I can always turn into, like, a whale.

LIAM: Perhaps, but the water breathing sounds good to me. I feel like a head-on–

TRAVIS: Isn't there something in the water?

LIAM: – run into the chasm is a bad idea.

ORION: I pull out my empty bottle, and I go, and I have this!

LIAM: Yes, he's got a bottle, plus, we've killed a fucking dragon. I know it's not an easy task to accomplish, but we're pretty badass, I think. We might have a good chance.

MARISHA: So wait, is going through the lake gonna get us through to the general?

LIAM: Well, we don't know.

TRAVIS: We haven't been down to the water's surface.

SAM: What's the best-case scenario? What, we come up behind them? It's still gonna be a fight.

TRAVIS: But maybe there's a different vantage point.

SAM: We can fly over them, that seems like a pretty good attack point.

TALIESIN: Some of us can fly over them.

MARISHA: Well we can figure out to where all of us can fly over them.I'm more concerned about us cloaking ourselves. Even if we're flying they're still going to see us.

SAM: There's an ancient death thing down there.

TRAVIS: He might die, didn't say it was foolproof.

SAM: I don't know, man, he's volunteering you.

ORION: Wait, what's going on?

LIAM: I mean, our options are: we can vote on it, although we all know Keyleth is just gonna go fucking do whatever she wants. Our options are–

MARISHA: That was one time.

LIAM: Just the one time.

MARISHA: Just one time.

TRAVIS: Never to be forgotten.

LIAM: Our options are a headlong advance into the middle of their camp. That's a big fucking force.

SAM: Or some sort of disguise, distraction.

TRAVIS: Tiberius.

MATT: Is the stream down by the way?

ZAC: It goes down every two hours and 17 minutes, it's been doing that for– It comes right back up.

MATT: All right, so let us know when it's back up.

SAM: Two hours and 17 minutes, that sounds like Lost or something.

TRAVIS: Tiberius. Do it.

MARISHA: Amityville Twitch stream.

TRAVIS: Go fly all the way down to the water's surface. Like Michael J. Fox in Back to the Future 2, and check out if there's any other tunnels that we haven't seen, or ways to go.

ORION: Isn't this the same water that you bended?

MARISHA: I think so.

TRAVIS: We didn't go down to the water's surface though, did we?

MARISHA: Well, we went over the top of it, and kind of looked down.

TRAVIS: Oh, we did? We went all the way down?

MARISHA: When I was bending the water back, we were kind of in that area, right? That was that area, but the lake–

SAM: Do it smart. Let's go bomb them.

ASHLEY: What if, I mean–

TRAVIS: Can you freeze it?

ASHLEY: Do you guys wanna like, put me down on a rope, and I can just run around, see if there's any openings? I mean I have a lot of armor.

LIAM: Go fishing with you?

MARISHA: Go fishing, yeah.

ASHLEY: Well no, just like halfway, and then I can run around and look for tunnels. Well some of us can fly, so we're okay.

MARISHA: I can attempt to try and drain the lake a little bit.

LIAM: And Keyleth said that she can cast Water Breathing, can help us breathe underneath the surface.

TRAVIS: We have two underwater breathing potions.

MARISHA: Control Water's a level five spell.

MATT: I realize that. But that's a lot of water.

TRAVIS: But remember, we're slow as balls in water.

LIAM: You were having trouble, if I recall, just getting the waterfall out of the way to create, I mean it was amazing, but–

MARISHA: I managed to get it stopped–

LIAM: I know, you fucking saved the day, but we're talking about–

MARISHA: A lake.

LIAM: Yeah, Lake Superior.

SAM: This is not just a lake, there is a death monster in there. If we go under the water, we're dead.

TRAVIS: Can we stand on it? Anything, if we wanna fight it? Or are we gonna be fighting it in the water?

TALIESIN: Well, we can all have Water Breathing.

TRAVIS: Yeah, but we'll be slow.

SAM: And we'll be underwater, where there's a death monster.

TRAVIS: I'm not worried about that part of the question.

LIAM: There's 50 to 100 fucking creeps up top.

SAM: Well, then let's come up with a good plan.

ASHLEY: Maybe there's hidden stairs or something, like in Indiana Jones?

TRAVIS: Can you electrify the water and fry the guy?

LIAM: Hold up, hold up.

ORION: There's only 26 people up there. On our last count.

TALIESIN: Before the ones we killed, or after?

ORION: After.

LIAM: Those are the ones we saw, though. How do we know how far back the camp goes? How many are in the gate behind it?

TRAVIS: Don't a couple of you have Lightning? Can't you deep-fry the water?

MARISHA: I mean, I can make a giant whirlpool.

LIAM: Wait a second, wait a second. Clarota, you've been listening to our thoughts for the last ten minutes.

SAM: And what clear thoughts they have been.

LIAM: What do you think? What do you think?

MATT: “What resides in that lake is something you wish not to tamper with. An ancient mind.”

TRAVIS: Blah blah blah. Hodie-fucking-ho.

MATT: “It clouds the water with its own filth. You find yourself unable to breathe air.”

MARISHA: Didn't that happen already?

MATT: “Its mind, it takes–”

LIAM: Have you seen it?

MATT: “Yes.”

LIAM: It's big?

MATT: “It's rather large.”

ASHLEY: Is it like a many-armed…situation?

(all laugh)

MATT: “One could say, yes.”

ASHLEY: Okay. Swell.

LIAM: What's the sitch?

MARISHA: So we can face Cthulhu, or little Cthulhu minons, seems to be our choice.

ORION: Clarota.

TRAVIS: Why don't I have Lightning, I swear. Can't you fry the water first? See if it hurts it?

SAM: We can fly overhead and just Lightning the shit out of it.

TRAVIS: Do that, please. 'Cause maybe there's a way– there's a tunnel, and we come up behind them or whatever it was.

LIAM: That illithid took out my brain from like 100 feet.

SAM: You know what– wait, wait, if I may. When I was there, I saw the main general control all of them instantly, when he was about to make a sacrifice, or feed, or whatever he was doing. No offense. He instantly had all of their command. If we could somehow get to him, and cut off that connection, distract him, influence him somehow to command them to all jump in the lake, for instance. That would get rid of a lot of them all at once.

LIAM: Can you make me invisible?

SAM: I can get you there. I can make you unseeable, but not invisible.

LIAM: What?

TRAVIS: What's the difference?

SAM: I can make you a fly.

TALIESIN: May I examine– without removing– may I examine your device?

TRAVIS: Oh, shit.

MATT: Make a persuasion roll.

TRAVIS: Oh man, Percy, Percy.

SAM: What's he doing?

ORION: He's asking to–

TALIESIN: 16.

LIAM: What's he doing?

SAM: Touching the hat.

MATT: He glares at you and says, “Our agreement does not include this interaction.”

TALIESIN: It may be the key to returning you to your people.

TRAVIS: Tiberius.

ORION: Yes?

TRAVIS: Would you go fry the fucking lake?

TALIESIN: I won't touch. I will just look.

ORION: I'm reading my book.

TRAVIS: No, I want you to–

MATT: It kind of bows its head, but does not move closer. It just slightly shows you an element of it.

TALIESIN: Can I understand how it functions?

MATT: Best you can tell it looks like a skullcap that's been kind of decently made for what it is, but you can see some of the hammer marks on it, or whatever it was put together. It appears to be a very simple piece of metallic material.

TALIESIN: So it's magic.

MATT: It looks like it is some sort of enchantment, probably what's causing the effect. It's not any mechanical device that causes it.

TRAVIS: (metal clanging)

TALIESIN: So there'd be no way to build something to create a feedback loop?

MARISHA: Ooh. I see what you're getting at.

TALIESIN: I wanna try and see if there's any way that I can take a look at this and figure out a way to build some sort of feedback system.

MARISHA: We need to build a coconut radio.

SAM: We don't even have a laboratory.

TALIESIN: He wants a coconut radio.

ORION: I love coconuts.

MATT: You have never interacted with anything psionic-based before. The time to research that, and the materials needed to do it would take months.

TALIESIN: Plan two–

LIAM: This is a fairly shitty situation.

TRAVIS: While all this is going on!

TALIESIN: Because if they can't see, what if we blind them?

LIAM: How?

MARISHA: With some sort of interference?

TALIESIN: With a really bright light.

ORION: Oh, I love doing light things.

TALIESIN: What if they are so blind they can't actually see us coming?

MARISHA: I believe Pike and I both have access to spells like that.

SAM: I assume that would make us pretty blind as well.

MARISHA: Not necessarily.

ASHLEY: Not if we wear our–

SAM: – sunglasses?

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Can I attempt to build sunglasses?

SAM: Before we build sunglasses–

MATT: You can probably make a couple with the materials you have on hand. You are limited when it comes to resources, as you are currently halfway underground.

TALIESIN: Even better.

TRAVIS: Vax could show his ass, that's a pretty white light.

TALIESIN: That's as white as it gets.

LIAM: It's pale as shit. When I go to the beach, I don't tan, I stroke.

SAM: But I thought we established that they don't need visual contact to influence us, they just need to be able to be aware–

TALIESIN: Once they have visual contact they can influence us, but they need to make that visual contact in the first place.

MATT: “The dark, deep dwarves, they hate light. This I know.”

MARISHA: I think it'll stun them long enough for us to get across.

TALIESIN: If we could perhaps put some Light spells on the back and the front of our shields, so that we are guarded from it.

ORION: If you can make a pair for our friend here, that would help him out, I assume.

MARISHA: Wait, that's not a bad idea. Pike, can we temporarily enchant the magic carpet as a spotlight as we fly over? As a light death ray?

LIAM: We've seen you surrounded in radiant light before, you think you can do that to the carpet?

ASHLEY: I mean, I have–

MARISHA: We should have Daylight. Where's my book? Where's my Player's Handbook?

LIAM: And Clarota, while they're figuring that out, if we remain to be hidden or blind our opponents as we approach your kin, will not know our thoughts 'til they see us?

MATT: “Yes. They need to look into you, by knowing you're there.”

LIAM: Can I fight one of your kin with a blindfold on?

MATT: “Perhaps.”

TRAVIS: I thought if they could see you–

ORION: Clarota. The mind hive that you possess, how close can one be before it actually affects? Say 100 feet, caught my friend in mid air, alas, in their run-in. Is its range about–?

MATT: “That's about the distance, yes.”

SAM: You may not know the answer to this. I don't doubt your knowledge and wisdom, but I happen to have a ring with mind shielding, will that aid me in any way?

MATT: “It may. If it gives you resistance to psionic influence, it would be of aid, yes.”

MARISHA: Daylight.

TRAVIS: Do we have a plan?

LIAM: It wouldn't be hard to get hold of some pitch down here, some tar.

SAM: To burn?

LIAM: No. If you can be invisible, and you have a ring of mind shielding, and you can carry a bucket of pitch to that motherfucker, you can splash it on its face, cover its eyes, and it's helpless.

TALIESIN: My God.

SAM: Or I can hang that big brass pot on its head.

TRAVIS: But I'm wearing that.

LIAM: Yes, but it could take it off, possibly. If you smear sticky shit on its eyes–

SAM: So wait, I just have to blind it?

LIAM: Then it can't control–

SAM: Well, I happen to have a Blindness spell!

MATT: “It may still try, but to be blind, it would be very difficult for it to pry into your mind.”

SAM: Could it still control the others, though?

MATT: “Probably. That is a permanent enslavement.”

SAM: So you want me to go in there, solo, invisible, and try to blind this thing.

LIAM: No, not solo.

SAM: I'm in!

LIAM: I like your idea of turning me into a fly. You and I go in–

TALIESIN: And we've got Light spells.

MARISHA: Pike and I can cast Daylight on our magic carpet.

ASHLEY: I can cast it onto my shield, and then on the carpet, and we would have a double–

MARISHA: I have to take a nap, though. What's that?

LIAM: But that could get us in close. Scanlan and I could get in closer, and blind it, and I could stab it in the head.

MARISHA: I mean, technically I can also turn into something flying, I could back you guys up, if someone else wants to take the carpet.

SAM: We can all get there. We can all get there.

MARISHA: I can cast Daylight on your helmet. On your pot helmet.

TRAVIS: Really?

MARISHA: Yeah.

TRAVIS: That I'm game with

MARISHA: All right.

TRAVIS: I'll be like a lighthouse, walking around. Crushing life.

(all laugh)

MATT: You'd be the cover of John Carpenter's “The Thing.”

LIAM: Did everyone hear Percy, that's a good idea.

TALIESIN: Two fronts.

LIAM: Yes, two fronts.

SAM: What is it?

LIAM: You and I separate from the group, they go in shining like a beacon, you and I (buzzes) in, and while the illithid is focused on them, we go in, you blind him, and I stab him in his maw. It's pretty good.

SAM: That's a suicide mission.

TRAVIS: I like it, let's do it.

LIAM: What else are we going to do?

TALIESIN: I'm behind this plan.

SAM: Surgical, special ops, seal team six.

MARISHA: What does Vax have to say about this?

LIAM: Vex, you mean? My sister Vex?

MARISHA: Yes, that one.

LIAM: That's a good question.

SAM: Oh, Vex, you look so tired.

MATT: Vex, your sister seems genuinely perturbed by the circumstance, but looks to you and says, “Look, I found him, you deal with the situation. Just tell me what to do.”

SAM: She's so like that.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Let's do it.

LIAM: I gave up trying to understand her years ago.

MARISHA: Do you know what time it is? I'm feeling a bit nappy.

ORION: Your hair looks fine.

LIAM: Well, I–

SAM: Wait– (shushes)

MATT: “If you need rest, then rest. Time of day has no bearing down here.”

MARISHA: I have to rest so I can– I'm gonna read up on this Daylight spell, so that you and me can both cast it.

ASHLEY: Yeah, we'll just take a nap and just get, you know, rest our muscles, and get ready for the fight.

TRAVIS: I'm gonna read up on this Chopping Head spell. Yep, I'm read up.

SAM: I'm gonna sing a little song to inspire a couple of my allies here, if I can.

MATT: Okay, I would recommend doing it after rest. The dice would go away while they rest.

SAM: Okay, forget it.

MARISHA: I go ahead and I light an incense in our teepee, and I make some flowers grow. That's better. That's nice.

TALIESIN: I'm gonna do a little bit of work on that first trick arrow. On the trap arrow. Since I've got a little time.

MATT: Go ahead and make a roll.

TALIESIN: That's a– What am I rolling?

MATT: Your engineering– your tinker's kit.

TALIESIN: Oh, it's just an intelligence roll, right?

MATT: Plus your tinker's kit proficiency. It's down underneath your skills. Proficiency, at the very bottom left.

TALIESIN: Yeah, I don't have a number for that.

MATT: You can add your proficiency modifier to your intelligence check. Add your intelligence modifier plus four.

TALIESIN: Ah, thank you. 17.

MATT: All right, and so what are you trying to accomplish with this arrow again?

TALIESIN: I was just trying to make an entanglement arrow. It's a trapper's arrow.

MATT: Okay. You manage to work out what seems like a tanglefoot bag-type detonation, where if an arrow were fired, it would be a grapple check against the individual, probably give them penalties until they're able to break free of the grapple. So yeah, success on that one.

TRAVIS: Nice job, Doogie.

TALIESIN: I'm gonna be Hawkeyeing Laura out at some point, I got a couple of them.

ORION: Before I retire, Clarota, you said you wanted to speak with me later. Anything in particular, or you wish to save it for after the battle?

MATT: “Perhaps after. I just am curious about the source of your Arcane power.”

ORION: Ooh, I'd be happy to discuss it. I could learn a great deal from you as well.

MATT: “Later.”

ORION: Later, of course. I go to my books.

MATT: So Clarota closes his eyes, and kind of goes into a meditative stance. The rest of you, those who have spells to choose, go ahead and choose your spells accordingly for the next day.

TRAVIS: Rub it in. I'm sharpening my ax.

MATT: Good. Good.

TRAVIS: It is good.

SAM: Just doing my vocal warmups. ♫ Me me me me me me me me me ♫

MARISHA: I'm meditating.

SAM: ♫ Molto bene, molto bene, molto bene, molto bene ♫

TRAVIS: The human torch was denied a bank loan.

(all laugh)

MATT: So as you all have your evening's rest…Not very comfortable. Number one, you're in the middle of a tent of a goblinoid city. Second, just the general proximity of sleeping near an illithid, you just have a general sense of unsettling dreams, imagery that is disturbing. Pike, you have many flashbacks to the vision you had, and actually wake partway through the night in a cold sweat. As you wake up, you all kind of slowly come to, it's about four hours into the evening's rest. You feel a slight tremor, a familiar tremor that you felt once before in this cavern.

(rumbling)

MATT (CONT'D): You feel the ground begin to vibrate and shake.

TALIESIN: I get up and look around.

SAM: Is Clay awake?

(all laugh)

MATT: Eyes are open, just sitting there.

SAM: Clarota, do you know what that rumbling is?

MATT: “There are many creatures that live in this rock. You'd best be still.”

SAM: Ooh, still.

MATT: “Still.”

ORION: Don't move.

TRAVIS: So, vocal warm ups.

MATT: Everyone make a stealth check.

MARISHA: Oh!

TRAVIS: Fucking nipples.

MARISHA: Pooper.

TRAVIS: We get advantage on that, right?

MATT: Nope!

ORION: 16.

SAM: 14.

MARISHA: 19.

TALIESIN: 18.

LIAM: 20.

ASHLEY: One.

TRAVIS: One.

(all laugh)

MATT: Two natural ones?

TRAVIS: Yup!

SAM: After her two natural 20's.

LIAM: Nothing to add.

ASHLEY: Nothing to add. Well I'm new to armor, you know.

MATT: You both rolled natural ones. Those both count as two failures.

ASHLEY: Fuck.

MATT: Thankfully, the rest of your group all rolled pretty high. So it was four versus five.

ORION: Yes!

MATT: You guys just barely succeed. As you all hold still, barely breathe, the rumbling intensifies, and goes on for a good minute, minute and a half, before it eventually subsides.

TRAVIS: Aw. Thought we were gonna get a warm up.

MATT: Fades into the distance. Rumbling is complete. It appears to be no issue. Clarota says, “Many of these creatures, they pick up on movement, in that sound, be wary.”

LIAM: What creatures are you speaking of now? Is this something–

SAM: The rumbling creatures.

LIAM: But what are they?

ORION: Probably buttholes.

MATT: “I've only got glimpses.”

LIAM: This is something worse than umberhulks, I assume.

MATT: “Larger, yes.”

SAM: All right, we've all rested up.

LIAM: Buttholes in the underdark!

SAM: I had a crazy dream. It said if Geek & Sundry got to 1,400 followers, there would be some sort of a giveaway.

ORION: Oh, I had the same dream, Scanlan!

SAM: Wow!

MATT: Yeah guys, just so you're aware, every 50 subscribers we get, we are giving away an awesome Geek & Sundry game package.

ZAC: Ethanmyhead just won one.

MATT: Oh, there you go, congratulations! We already got a winner. We'll be putting those out for every 50 subscribers we get tonight. We'll be choosing one to win that awesome award, our wonderful package, so keep that in mind.

SAM: So the plan is again, you and I, stealth. The rest, attack with light? What's first, what's second, what happens here?

LIAM: Well, I need to take a moment to find some– I'm gonna look around and see if I can find any pitch, anywhere in the goblin camp.

MATT: Okay, go ahead and make a survival check. Actually, this would be investigation.

LIAM: Investigation. I got the exact same number, 12.

MATT: Takes about an hour. You manage to find, essentially, a few piles of rather disgusting, sticky, goblinoid refuse, that you imagine will probably stick and burn pretty well. In a pitch-type way, yeah.

LIAM: Goblin shit?

MATT: You find just a whole bunch of goblin shit.

LIAM: Let's cook it up a little.

TALIESIN: How do you feel about lacing it with gun powder?

SAM: I'll make some fire for you.

LIAM: Feel pretty good about that.

MARISHA: Goblin molotov cocktails? I like that.

TALIESIN: Goblin poop cocktail.

LIAM: So here's how I think this goes. I think the team infuses the carpet, and any shields, or head pots they have with radiant light. They go in and make a big stink on the side of the camp. You and I go in, you're invisible. I'm a–

SAM: Fly, flea, mosquito, dragonfly, whatever you'd like.

LIAM: Yes, let's say fly. We go in, find the illithid, and then we pop in, you yell, “Hey, Spanky,” throw goblin shit in its face.

SAM: Or I try to blind it with magic.

LIAM: Yes.

TALIESIN: Both.

ORION: Both! Why not both?

LIAM: We want to increase our odds. As soon as he's blind, I go in for the kill. And then it's on us to deal with what happens after that.

TRAVIS: It's playtime.

LIAM: It's playtime.

SAM: Might I suggest one other wrinkle.

LIAM: Yes, please do.

SAM: Remember there are some dwarves being held captive. We can make our way to them and release them.

TRAVIS: We don't need all of them, though. Just to cause further distraction, or to get some allies on the inside.

LIAM: It's possible they could be weary, frightened.

TALIESIN: Mind controlled.

LIAM: Seems unreliable– yes, mind controlled.

TRAVIS: They're probably ready to fight, like me.

(all laugh)

SAM: Grog, we understand, you want to bash some things.

LIAM: Your time to kill is coming.

SAM: All right, is there anyone else in the party who could help us with stealth, or anything?

ASHLEY: Definitely not me.

SAM: Okay.

TRAVIS: Clang clang.

ASHLEY: Clang clang clang clang.

MATT: As a note, just remember. Because you're the one who walked through. There is essentially a shanty town, a tent city of war tents. With a few rock formations. You also notice that, or you remember last time, that there was the main square that had the raised platform. And then there was the small stone barracks, where it seemed both the mind flayer and the duergar general both went back in.

SAM: So we gotta go into the barracks.

MATT: Well that's where you saw at least they were last time you were there.

LIAM: That's our starting point, I imagine.

ORION: Well, there's two targets.

SAM: So we gotta get in, and then get in.

LIAM: The main thing is to get the illithid, because if he's out, nobody's– Then they're all separate. He's playing chess with all his minions until we take him out.

TRAVIS: I hate chess.

ORION: So we all strike right on him. You two are going to take that little journey. The rest of us, what shall we do? I have many options and they're all fun. So Percy. Your sniper rifle. I should think that you want to post up and start taking out position.

TALIESIN: I'll do that at first, but then eventually I'm going to just have to jump into the fray.

ORION: Yes, of course, onslaught to the rest of the camp, that we'll go about it too, right? Make a bunch of noise, a bunch of light.

SAM: How are you going to get Grog over there?

MARISHA: I'm gonna put a giant sunlight beacon on his head, and I'm gonna release him to the wilds.

LIAM: Yes, but there's no bridge, we talked about–

MARISHA: Oh, how are we gonna get him over it?

LIAM: We have an infinite amount of rope.

SAM: How do we get it over there?

LIAM: Tiberius talks about making him light as a feather.

TRAVIS: Or you can fly me.

SAM: Yes, you can fly him, right?

ORION: Perhaps you can fly.

TRAVIS: Why don't we turn my pot into a lighthouse, and then you fly me over, and I'll do like, abominable snow man walk.

MARISHA: I like that.

LIAM: Clarota, is there anything you can do to help us on this endeavor?

MATT: “I can try to cloud his mind with mine, but you have to swear to protect me from harm.”

LIAM: You have our word.

SAM: – that we will try.

(all laugh)

MATT: “Then I will come. You must work swiftly. If we can leap most of the city, get to that barrack, storm it, and take out the mind flayer that resides.”

SAM: Let's set down right in the middle of the thing.

MARISHA: Well I was gonna say, can we set down where we're kind of backing you guys up, holding the fort down while you guys go?

LIAM: There's no bridge.

SAM: We all have to get there.

MARISHA: I'm not worried about that.

LIAM: Get over together, get to the edge.

SAM: Yes, but where are we going to make land? In the middle of the shit, next to the barracks?

MARISHA: I say we might as well go closest to the barracks as we can get.

SAM: Okay, then you and I can get in the barracks.

LIAM: That's a good idea. If we go as high as we can, and just hug the ceiling of this motherfucker, and then go down in the middle. And as we're going down, you turn me into a fly and go invisible, and that's when all hell breaks lose.

TRAVIS: I like that part. Let's do it.

LIAM: No time like the present.

TRAVIS: Hands up if you're in.

MARISHA: I'm gonna start buffing people like crazy.

ORION: I cast Stoneskin.

TALIESIN: Gonna be buffing us like a vampire slayer.

MARISHA: Oh! Joss Whedon up in this bitch!

SAM: Question to the dungeon master.

MATT: Yes.

SAM: I think my Polymorph spell is a concentration spell.

MATT: It is, yes.

SAM: I'm going solo.

(sighs)

TRAVIS: Do it.

SAM: I can get you in. I can make you a fly, but I can't be invisible at the same time.

LIAM: I will sneak through. If shit goes south, I will peel off and join the others.

MARISHA: Well, I can cast Pass Without A Trace on myself, and as long as we hug close to me, there's an area around me that's like a dark shadow. We get like, all stealthy.

SAM: We're going in.

LIAM: We're just gonna have to improvise that. We'll do it live, we'll do it live.

MARISHA: Wait, wait, wait! Don't go in yet. Let me buff people.

MATT: You said you were casting Stoneskin? Stoneskin is concentration. The moment you cast another concentration spell, it goes away.

ORION: Oh, right. So I don't cast it, then.

(all laugh)

ORION (CONT'D): God damned concentration spells.

TRAVIS: I would like to cast, um.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS (CONT'D): Blood Lust on myself. Blood Lust.

MARISHA: I go ahead and I cast Enhance Ability on Vex.

ALL: Vax.

LIAM: Sorry, everybody does it. Our mother did it, I do it sometimes.

MATT: To increase his dexterity?

MARISHA: To increase your dexterity.

MATT: So essentially you have advantage on dexterity-based checks, yeah.

MARISHA: Which is your stealth, right?

MATT: Yes.

MARISHA: And then I'm gonna go ahead and let me keep track of all this. And I'm gonna go ahead and cast Daylight on Grog's helmet. Are we ready for this, are we going?

SAM: Yeah, let's go.

TRAVIS: Let's do it.

MARISHA: And I'm gonna go ahead and cast Daylight on–

SAM: Wait.

TRAVIS: What?

SAM: Wait. We're trying to sneak over them before we land. Don't cast Daylight on anything yet. We don't wanna be bright and shiny in the sky.

MATT: A giant flare coasting over the city.

TRAVIS: We'll be like UFO's.

LIAM: (hissing)

MARISHA: I'm gonna go ahead and cast Pass Without A Trace on myself.

MATT: All right, so that's preparation there.

SAM: I'm gonna sing a little ditty to inspire Vax.

♫ I didn't see the Vax

♫ 'Cause he's so goddamned stealthy

♫ Da da da da da da da da

TRAVIS: Was that “I Saw The Sun”?

SAM: Yes it was.

(all laugh)

MATT: That wondrous rendition allows you a d8 inspiration dice, hold on to that.

ORION: Is everybody finished?

LIAM: Vox Machina, let's do this shit.

MARISHA: I turn into an eagle, and I'll take the gnomes.

MATT: All right. Scanlan. Pike is heavy with the plate mail, but it's still enough to carry with your giant eagle form.

LIAM: Tiberius, Percy, and I are on the carpet, and Tiberius, are you good to help Grog fly across?

ORION: Fly.

MATT: At which point you feel this strange lifting sensation, for a second your stomach kind of has butterflies, and you realize that you can just think forward, and you drift forward. Think back, you drift back. Think up, you drift up.

TRAVIS: Amazing, don't puke in the helmet though, that would be gross.

(imitates puking)

ORION: Am I light enough for him to take me in?

TRAVIS: I can't see anything. Just a cauldron on my head.

ORION: For him to carry me.

MATT: For him to carry you? Yeah, yeah.

ORION: I hop on your back. Let's go, Grog.

TRAVIS: Great.

MARISHA: I guess the rest of them are on the rug?

TRAVIS: I can't see, so you gotta tell me. I start flying the wrong way.

ORION: Back up, the other way, other way, very good.

MATT: You actually clutch Grog by the sides of his face, and start steering him.

(all laugh)

ORION: Wherever I move your head, just tilt that way.

SAM: Are we all in flight now?

LIAM: We're all taken care of, yes.

SAM: And the carpet?

LIAM: Tiberius, Percy, and I are on the carpet.

SAM: What about Vex? Is she with us?

ASHLEY: She's on the carpet.

SAM: She's staying behind.

MATT: Vex, for the time being, because it's just easier to organize for that, is coming on the carpet with you guys, and is preparing in case she is needed.

TALIESIN: She's just quiet 'cause she's feeling smug about the last game.

LIAM: Yes.

MATT: She's feeling smug about making another RPG right now.

LIAM: She'll be back.

SAM: I wanna see how you fly, Grog.

ORION: It's really rickety!

TRAVIS: It's one arm in and one forward.

(all laugh)

ORION: Just think.

LIAM: Do you propel yourself with thoughts?

MATT: It's an awkward zig zag.

TALIESIN: Do you think happy thoughts?

MARISHA: I'm gonna fly in the middle between Grog and the carpet, that way my Pass Without A Trace encompasses everybody.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: I turn to Scanlan and say, Scanlan, we are probably going to die today. It has been an honor.

SAM: It has been an honor.

ASHLEY: You won't die today.

SAM: Only one of us will die. And it won't be me. I can be invisible.

(all laugh)

ORION: You're not listening, it'll just happen.

LIAM: What were you saying Tiberius?

ORION: Nothing.

LIAM: Don't play it that way, what were you saying?

ORION: I was saying, if you're all finished, I'll just make you invisible right before it happens.

MATT: You guys are all coasting over the chasm. Now you're over the top of the large bridge, and the 200-foot-wide open hole in this tunnel that leads to the lake below. As you glance down, you can see just a little bit of a trickle from the soft red light that is deeper inside. You can see the small streams of lava, they're just slowly pooling at the bottom on the outskirts of the lake proper. As you begin to make it to the other side, you can see tiny shapes moving in this barely lit war camp of the duergar. As you're coasting over, and Clarota is along with you guys with his hood up, he kind of whispers into all of your heads, just, “Beware that some of these armies carry abominations created below within my city. I know not what to expect from them. So be wary.” As this happens, everyone make a stealth check. Everyone, because of the Pass Without A Trace, everyone gets a plus ten to their stealth check.

TRAVIS: Plus ten?

MATT: Plus ten. Thanks to Keyleth.

SAM: Thank God.

MATT: Keyleth, however, you are carrying two gnomes, so you have a disadvantage on it.

ASHLEY: Oh no.

LIAM: It's all right.

MARISHA: Even with the plus 10? 18?

MATT: 18.

SAM: 15.

TALIESIN: 22.

TRAVIS: 27.

SAM: Wow.

ASHLEY: 23.

LIAM: 28.

MATT: All right. You guys begin to crest over the very top of the war camp, and looking down you can see now, there are what looks to be the beginnings of tunneling siege engines being constructed.

SAM: What? Siege?

MATT: Siege. You can see giant wheeled carts with drills up front, giant auger bores that are being currently constructed. You can see what looks like a series of weapons being stacked at the ready. You can see there is a preparation for some sort of attack on the city above.

LIAM: Want to take Kraghammer.

MATT: Continue to press ahead. There does not seem to be any reaction to your flying.

SAM: Don't say anything.

LIAM: This close to the ceiling.

ASHLEY: Good thing we didn't cast the light.

ORION: We can all talk to each other.

SAM: Whisper to each other. Shut up!

MARISHA: Oh, cool.

SAM: Just wait 'til we get there.

MATT: You guys make it towards the center portion of the city.

TRAVIS: Roll shake it, roll shake it, roll shake it.

TALIESIN: Die rolls.

MATT: You can just start beginning to see the opening in the center of this war camp. There is a circle where there are no tents constructed, you can see what looks to be a small wooden platform, and there is a stone building that is of makeshift functional construction. Not pretty, but functional, looks like a barracks, or some sort of a large bunker. Right on the northern side of that opening, that center portion of the war camp. That would be what you saw, both the general and the mind flayer head of this encampment go into last time you–

SAM: The barracks.

MATT: Yes.

SAM: With a roof?

MATT: There is a roof to it, you don't know if there's any roof access. But there is a roof.

LIAM: Tiberius, can you turn me invisible now.

ORION: (sputtering)

SAM: But we're still in the air, right? He's gotta concentrate on that.

LIAM: He's sitting on the carpet.

SAM: Yeah but he's–

MARISHA: Thinking about–

SAM: Him flying.

ORION: I cast invisibility on you, that's when everything happens.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Just falls from the air.

LIAM: So are we floating above?

MATT: You guys are currently floating about 100 to 150 feet above the war camp, you do not appear to have been noticed yet.

TRAVIS: Get down there and wing it.

SAM: Should we land on the roof? Or do we land right outside the barracks door? What do we do?

ASHLEY: Roof, roof, roof.

SAM: You guys wanna stay up and we'll go down?

TRAVIS: You go! Yes.

SAM: Yeah?

TRAVIS: Yes!

MARISHA: We can start on the roof, that way that gives us time.

LIAM: But I can't go invisible while you're flying.

TRAVIS: Who needs you to be invisible? You're a stealthy bastard.

ORION: We land on the roof, we get in there, I cast Invisibility on you, and then you go do your thing.

LIAM: We're running the risk of as we come down on Duergar, going (groans).

ORION: We would risk that anyway, either way.

SAM: I'm so scared right now.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Why don't we land on the roof and we all lay flat, except for the people that are going in, and you cast Invisibility.

SAM: This is the exact conversation they had when they were about to go kill Osama.

(all laugh)

ORION: Wait, I have an idea.

TRAVIS: Oh God.

ORION: Is there enough weight for me get on the carpet at this point?

ASHLEY: This is fucking stressful.

MATT: You can certainly try. There was weight, but you're not aware of how much was on it.

ORION: Yes I do, it's 1,000 pounds.

MATT: You don't know how much weight is on there, total.

ORION: Everybody, how much do you weigh?

SAM: Don't ask a woman that!

ORION: I'm sorry, Your Highness, but I need to know. The idea is if, I can step off on the carpet, and hang with you guys, then Grog you can float down to the whatchamacallit, and take Vax here, then I can, oh shit, I need to be near you to cast it, damn it!

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Let's just land on the roof.

ASHLEY: Let's land on the roof.

LIAM: We're gonna go in, we're gonna hit the roof, you turn me invisible, he turns him invisible, you guys light up the night, and we just do it, we just gotta go.

ASHLEY: We're lighting up now?

SAM: You light up on the roof? Let's look for access first. Don't light up 'til we give the go aside.

ASHLEY: We're still not safe stealthy.

ORION: We need to wait before we light up.

LIAM: If anyone takes notice, then turn off the lights.

SAM: By the way–

TALIESIN: Do not light up until you see the black or greens of their eyes.

SAM: By the way, Clarota–Clarota you have definitely picked the right people to assist you.

MATT: There's no verbal response, but you do just emotionally sense a slight hint of regret.

(all laugh)

MATT: Emanating from the mind flayer.

SAM: We got this! All right, let's go land on the roof.

LIAM: All right, let's do it.

MATT: You guys descend.

ORION: Down, down.

MATT: Eagle flies down, you both, (wind rushing), as part of the landing, everyone make a secondary stealth check.

TALIESIN and MARISHA: We still have that plus 10?

MATT: You still have the spell.

ORION: Oh yes!

MARISHA: Oh, that was cocked.

TALIESIN: Yeah!

MARISHA: Oh, no!

TALIESIN: You're a terrible person.

SAM: 30.

ORION: 20.

MARISHA: I'm like those boobies, that crash land when they fall.

MATT: You rolled at disadvantage?

MARISHA: Well, I rolled a one.

MATT: Okay. Two failures.

TALIESIN: That's a 15, 29.

TRAVIS: 23.

ASHLEY: 21.

LIAM: 28.

MATT: Pass Without A Trace is the saving grace. A bit of a harsh landing, from your perspective, but thankfully you have two small gnomes to break your fall.

ASHLEY and SAM: (groan)

MATT: You drag them a little bit across the stonework on the top. It's not stonework, actually. Most of this whole thing, is stonework, it looks like the roof of this is made of like a thick scavenged wood. Whether it was taken from the surface or from the mines itself, it is just wooden planks that are all keeping–

ASHLEY: Let's go in through the roof.

TALIESIN: It's reclaimed, it's very nice.

LIAM: If that thing sees us, though, it could be game over. I still think we should stick to the plan of blinding it.

ORION: Yeah, do it.

SAM: So some of us need to go inside.

LIAM: You and I.

TRAVIS: Yeah, the two go inside, and if shit goes down, we light it up.

LIAM: I will fucking yell into my earring if shit goes down, and you guys gotta pray for me.

TRAVIS: Go find shit!

SAM: We look around for any roof access.

TRAVIS: Come on, Chip 'n' Dale.

MATT: Looking around, there is no roof entrance. It looks like it is purely a functional roof for any weathering, rocks, you do see there are a few small rocks and pieces of cavern that may have plummeted here.

SAM: No chimneys.

MATT: No chimneys, no nothing, there doesn't appear to be a fireplace, or any sort of interior like that. Glancing over the sides, you can see that on the floor– You can't really tell if there's two floors or not, it looks tall enough to have two floors, but you don't see a set of windows or anything that belies that to you. May just be a really tall single floor. But there are a couple of small window openings, one on each side of–

[static]

SAM: We're gonna go–

LIAM: Tiberius, could you do me a favor of making me disappear?

ORION: Yes, when I do this, though, it's going to be very cool.

(all laugh)

LIAM: Holy shit, where are my hands?

ORION: Right?

MATT: You immediately disappear from view. You currently, visually do not exist.

MARISHA: And you still have my buff.

TRAVIS: We're like, flat on the roof, right?

MATT: You guys are all on the roof now, you're fine. Your Fly spell vanishes, you feel your weight return to you for a second. For a split moment you're a little sad, 'cause you were having fun.

TRAVIS: Oh.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: I was a dancer.

SAM: We can see the window, we pick one of the sides, I don't know, west side.

MATT: West side!

SAM: Is it a single pane? Is it an openable window?

MATT: As you glance over, it is just an opening. There is no glass. There is nothing blocking the way. It is about roughly big enough to fit a normal-sized half-elf or human.

LIAM: I take Scanlan by the scruff, and swing him down.

SAM: Oh, I turn invisible.

MATT: As you grab him and you're bringing him down, you cast Invisibility on yourself, you both vanish now, all the rest of you are kind of holding your breath, hoping that now that you don't know what's happening, it's gonna go well.

LIAM: I'm scaling in after him.

LIAM: Go ahead and just make an acrobatics check.

SAM: Don't roll a one, please don't drop me.

LIAM: 18.

MATT: All right, yeah, you're good. You gingerly scale down the wall, the stones thankfully are just haphazardly put together, where there's enough grip space for you to catch on.

SAM: I have a climbing kit!

(all laugh)

LIAM: We're in, we're in.

MATT: Little late for that, but okay.

(all laugh)

MATT: You lower him down, you bring him inside, you step down through the opening, into the center of the hallway.

SAM: We can't talk to each other.

TRAVIS: Yes we get a map, finally!

SAM: We can't signal each other, and we don't know where each other is. I hold his hand.

(all laugh)

LIAM: We're holding hands, I'm leaning way down on the side.

TRAVIS: 'Course you are.

LIAM: Sam and I have done this before.

ORION: I use my earring.

SAM: I'm not gonna talk back to you, so whatever you say.

ORION: Just to remind you of how these particular things work, I'm not actually talking right now. So you can just talk to each other through the rings.

MATT: As the two of you step into this room, you look about you, and there are some ramshackle, makeshift beds in the room. Five to be exact, from right to left. This appears to be one portion of a barracks-type sleeping arrangement. Beds are empty, they're kind of tossed, they're not like well-kept or anything. There's sheets kind of tossed about, and it smells awful in here, but it–

LIAM: First, I just heard Tiberius' voice in my head. So I'm going to test it out and think. Scanlan, can you hear me?

SAM: Can I hear him?

MATT: From?

LIAM: I heard Tiberius whispering about.

SAM: From thoughts only, can I hear him?

MATT: No.

LIAM: I tug on his hand to keep going into the barracks.

SAM: I notice that his hand is weirdly cold and sweaty.

MATT: Yeah, not weirdly.

LIAM: You just lean to live with the stage fright, you never move past it. Should we pause right now?

MARISHA: You didn't bring your stuff?

LAURA: I didn't have it!

ORION: Come on in!

LIAM: Look, my sister's here.

LAURA: Hello!

LIAM: We'll make it work. We'll bring you up to speed later, you're on the roof of Osama Bin Laden's house.

(all laugh)

LIAM (CONT'D): So question for the DM, I'm invisible. Do I need to stealth, do I stealth?

MATT: There's still a stealth check 'cause you're invisible, but noise is still a factor. You just have advantage on your stealth check.

LIAM: So, I think we should probably stealth. And start moving in.

SAM: Yeah, that's, we tug each other.

MATT: Beyond being invisible, you guys make your stealth check.

SAM: I mean, I'm invisible, and I rolled a five.

MATT: You have an advantage, you roll twice. 'Cause you're both invisible.

SAM: 13.

LIAM: 20.

MATT: All right. You both feel you're stealthed, there is one opening into a hallway here.

LIAM: We have, does anyone have a laser light?

TRAVIS: Yep.

LIAM: All right.

TRAVIS: Squeeze it together. Press the little button.

LIAM: Squeeze it together? Ah, there we go. Okay so we're going to go down here.

MATT: Down to this one. As you guys step out, you can see immediately there are two duergar guards right by a door that leads to a central chamber.

LIAM: So we're gonna go this way.

MATT: All right. Immediately you see–

TRAVIS: I like how you guys have different-colored lightsabers.

MATT: Two more Duergar guards.

TRAVIS: (lightsaber noises)

LIAM: All right, I'm inching up, I'm pulling Scanlan behind me, but I'm inching up to this door, just peeking through, seeing what I can see.

MATT: Okay, looking inside, you can see these small symbols, basically just red stone, the glow stone, that lights the underground caverns here and in a large portion of Kraghammer, are just embedded in the wall in a small sconce. Peering through here, you see one against the wall, you also see along the edges here, what looks to be racks of spears and pikes and hammers and various war accoutrements of weapons, just hanging, and there's a set of armor, over a small, wooden arrangement, the armor itself is just being stored there. This looks to be like a fast-grab armory.

LIAM: Okay. I pull Scanlan by the hand, and we enter into this room.

SAM: This is so romantic.

LIAM: It's just like the day we met, Sam.

MATT: You guys enter.

LIAM: Quietly walking this way. We're past the door, that looks like the front door.

MATT: It is the front door, it is currently closed, though.

LIAM: We're gonna keep going this way.

SAM: Oh man, we're doing– we're flanking!

MATT: Just come out this way. There is one duergar here. There doesn't appear to be a doorway or entrance to the central chamber on this side of the hallway.

SAM: That's pretty good.

LIAM: I still have the pitch in a bucket. The shit in a bucket in my hand, by the way.

SAM: We can take these guys, I'm not worried about that.

LIAM: But we'd make noise. How far apart are the two duergar standing in that door?

MATT: They're about five feet apart, just enough space, like one is on each side of the doorway.

LIAM: Okay.

SAM: Wait. What are those red things right there?

MATT: Those are the small sconces with the glow stone, the red stone that lights the–

SAM: So we're trying to get there.

ORION: – with Greater Invisibility, so you can attack, and you'll still be invisible.

LIAM: I pull a gold coin out of my pocket, and throw it in this corner.

SAM: This is straight up Metal Gear.

(all laugh)

MATT: Go ahead and just make a general dexterity check.

LIAM: And because of Keyleth, I have advantage, correct?

MATT: Yes.

ORION: Sure do.

LIAM: So this is, what is this?

MATT: Just a dexterity modifier.

LIAM: So that's a 17.

MATT: All right, you–

(coin ringing)

MATT (CONT'D): Ringing sound, both of the duergar kinda look over. They look at each other. Grunt for a second. This one nods her head and begins walking over to inspect it, this one stays at its post.

MARISHA: (Metal Gear voice) Must have been my imagination.

(all laugh)

LIAM: I pull Scanlan behind me, and tiptoe right behind this asshole.

TRAVIS: Do it! Put it in him!

LIAM: And take out my vorpal blade. And reach out and grab him by the hair and stick it in the back of his neck.

SAM: You got my dice.

MATT: All right, so, as you reach up, you grasp the back of this really nasty, wiry, thick duergar hair–

LIAM: I'm so tense right now.

MATT: You yank the head back, and take the base of the blade, go ahead and make an attack roll. It's a surprise roll, so you have an advantage on the attack.

LIAM: Okay, good.

MATT: I believe you have a bonus too, if you get the attack.

LIAM: Yes.

MARISHA: Sneak attack?

LIAM: Well, I get–Yes, I get advantage, but you can't triple up on advantage I believe?

(loud bang offscreen)

SAM: What was that?

MATT: That was to freak you out. All right, so just double-checking here as part of your ability.

SAM: Remember every 50 subscribers gets a free giveaway.

ORION: Subscribe now, kids.

ASHLEY: What is that smile?

MATT: If you score it, and the creature is surprised, it is a critical hit, that's the other thing I was going to mention.

LIAM: Thank you. So this isn't a dexterity check, this is an attack.

MATT: This is an attack.

LIAM: Okay. So that's a 26.

MATT: That is going to hit, and that is a critical hit. Go ahead and roll damage with Sneak Attack.

TALIESIN: Yeah!

LAURA: Die die die.

LIAM: I'm sweating. Okay, that's two plus seven is nine. That's nine, that's just that part. Six. Seven. Nine. 14. And 19. Which is, what's doubled, the Sneak Attack damage?

MATT: The Sneak Attack damage and the dice damage.

MATT: And the dice damage, 19 plus, is 26, 52.

MARISHA: Oh!

TALIESIN: Whoa!

MATT: As you pull the head back, you can hear a slight, a slight (gurgles) is about as much noise as can make it out before the blade just, right out the front of its throat, blocking any passage of the air. As you hold it, you twist the blade, it goes limp in your hand, but you catch it and keep holding it there, so it doesn't make any noise. You're now clutching a dead duergar.

SAM: Easy, easy.

ASHLEY: (shushes) Night-night.

LAURA: Oh yeah!

TRAVIS: Lean him up against the wall! Like he's standing there.

LIAM: Just had a thought, I'm going to sit him back against the wall, and let him slide against it, and grab Scanlan, and into the room.

MATT: Into this room?

MARISHA: There's Scanlan.

TALIESIN: He's still standing up, kind of.

LAURA: Why is he leading Scanlan, what's happening?

LIAM: (shushes)

SAM: While I'm invisible, I look around for traps. I'm just gonna see if there's any trap doors.

MATT: Go ahead and make a perception check.

SAM: Not great?

LIAM: I got a 28.

SAM: Nine.

MATT: You notice no traps. What you do notice, though, is there a giant kind of war room table, at the top of this raised platform. It's about six feet up, and there's a stairway that leads up to it. You see at the table. One of the illithid mind flayers. The armored general that you saw before. And there are two other duergar currently at the table.

TRAVIS: Nope, nope, nope, nope.

ASHLEY: Stay invisible.

SAM: We can't communicate.

TRAVIS: You guys have got seconds until that other guard comes back.

LIAM: We can't talk.

MATT: You hear footsteps behind you.

LIAM: I put the bucket of shit into Scanlan's hands.

LAURA: What are you doing?

LIAM: Give him a little nudge, a gentle little nudge.

SAM: I step forward into the room, and I hurl it at the fucker's face. The mind controllers.

LIAM: And I'm rolling behind him at the same time. Behind the illithid, ready to go.

MATT: So I'll say you go up here as well?

LIAM: Oh yeah, behind him, behind him.

LAURA: What is happening?

MATT: Make a stealth check, both of you.

TRAVIS: Oh God, oh God. Oh God, over extended.

SAM: Wait, do we get the plus ten to stealth?

MATT: No.

LIAM: Plus advantage, oh thank christ.

SAM: 19.

LIAM: Using Scanlan's advantage, so 16, 29.

(sighs)

MATT: Okay. You slink up behind, seemingly unnoticed. There's a slight twitch to the mind flayer's head, for a second, as you go ahead, and take a big ol'–

SAM: Bucket of shit!

MATT: And fling it.

(all laugh)

MATT (CONT'D): Go ahead and make an attack roll. It would be, you're not proficient with goblin shit buckets, unfortunately, so go ahead and roll a d20, and add your dexterity.

ORION: (groans)

SAM: My dexterity?

MATT: Dexterity or strength, whichever's higher, strength higher?

SAM: No, no, strength is not higher for me. Oh, it is higher! So 19.

MATT: All righty.

TALIESIN: Oh my God.

MATT: You fling it as the Invisibility spell wears off of you as part of the attack, you fling the bucket. A spray of thick, green, goblin fecal matter goes streaking through the air as the illithid turns, its eyes wide, to see you suddenly appear, and then suddenly see this entire batch of thick goblin shit just (splashes) across its face. Suddenly you see his tentacles writhing, as it screams, all of you hear in your head a scream.

LIAM: I'm stabbing, I'm stabbing!

ORION: I cast Stoneskin immediately.

MATT: As this happens, you cast Stoneskin, you go in for the blade, and you hear a counter voice in your mind.

ASHLEY: Fuck.

MATT: Clarota going, “Now.”

MARISHA: I cast Light on Grog's head!

MATT: Your head comes to an extremely bright glow, all of you averting your gaze.

LIAM: This is stealth, right? Stealth for me?

MATT: No, you're invisible.

LIAM: Oh, okay.

SAM: Attack, attack, kill him!

LIAM: 29! 29!

MATT: That definitely rolls to hit, you have surprise. Go ahead and roll.

LIAM: That's a critical, right? I'm assassinating this mother fucker.

MATT: It's a critical, technically. Yep.

SAM: We're going for the general?

LIAM: The illithid can control us all.

ASHLEY: Should we go in?

ORION: We don't know anything.

MATT: So, roll damage on this.

LIAM: Roll my damage.

ORION: We just heard a scream. Oh, we can act on that.

TRAVIS: And I rage.

MATT: Stoneskin. Light on his head.

TRAVIS: Rage.

MATT: Going into a rage.

ASHLEY: Daylight on my shield.

MATT: Daylight on your shield.

LAURA: I'm so happy to be here.

(all laugh)

MATT: I will say for the purposes of this battle, there is no Trinket here, because Trinket would not have fit across the way to get there.

LAURA: Okay.

TRAVIS: Didn't you give her an arrow?

TALIESIN: Yes, and you have an entrapment arrow now.

LAURA: Okay, I get ready for that.

LIAM: Okay, DM? 62 into the back of his head.

TALIESIN: Oh, shit!

TRAVIS: 62?

ASHLEY: How?

LIAM: Critical hit.

MATT: You take the blade, and as it pierces the back–

LIAM: Oh, it's a poison one by the way.

ORION: Damn!

MATT: It pierces the back of its skull, you feel the muscles in its neck tense in reaction to the blade, but the blade slips past. You can see a gout of purplish-black blood begin to spill from its neck, as it instinctually reaches up, and pulls the blade from the back of its head. What's the DC on the poison?

LIAM: I have no idea.

MATT: It should be on the blade info.

LIAM: Poison dagger.

TALIESIN: Fuck. Ah!

LIAM: I think it's oh, it's 15.

TALIESIN: This was a good plan.

MATT: The poison does not seem to take effect, the body resists it. It is still alive. But it's clutching the back of its neck, as it turns around going (sputters), you can see its blood spurting out of its mouth, and its eyes are now just burning with rage. All the rest of these duergar are now reaching and pulling their weapons out. Everyone roll initiative.

(all yell)

LAURA: I don't have my stuff with me.

LIAM: Natural 20.

MATT: Oh, shit.

SAM: Let's kill some bad guys.

TRAVIS: I don't know what you're doing.

MATT: All right, so. 25 to 20?

LIAM: 20. Natural 20.

MATT: But you have no bonuses? You should have your dex bonus too.

LIAM: Oh yeah, that's a 25.

MATT: So, I'm gonna say you're probably going in first, buddy.

TALIESIN: Yeah!

MATT: All right, 20, 25 to 20, anyone else?

LAURA: Oh, I think I got like a 21.

MATT: What'd you roll?

LAURA: I got 16 plus–

MATT: Yep, that'd be 21, yeah. All right, so. 19, anyone?

TALIESIN: 19.

MATT: 19, nice.

LAURA: No.

TALIESIN: Gonna wing it.

MATT: 18, anyone?

TRAVIS: 18.

MATT: Nice.

ORION: I got 16.

MARISHA: Do you have like a picture, or a file anywhere, saved of your–

LAURA: I got jack shit!

MARISHA: Of your sheet?

LIAM: We snuck into the war camp.

LAURA: We're in the war camp?

LIAM: We all landed on the top of their main building.

MATT: So, what's your?

SAM: 14.

ORION: I have 16.

MATT: 16, all right, so Tiberius. Scanlan, what was yours?

ASHLEY: Nine.

MARISHA: Also nine.

ASHLEY: Not to brag.

TRAVIS: Ashley's first two rolls were 20s.

MATT: All right, top of the round is Vax, with initiative.

LIAM: I'm just gonna (grunts) in the back of his head some more. I'm still invisible according to Tiberius' Greater Invisibility spell.

ORION: No no no, as soon as I cast Stoneskin, you were attacking, that's why I said this is all going–

MATT: You are now visible, you are not stealthed.

LIAM: Stab him in the back of the head. For assassinate, do I get the critical still here, DM?

MATT: No. You've gotten the one hit, it is completely aware of you, it is not a surprise attack.

LIAM: So this is a 28.

MATT: It is so aware of you, it has never been more aware of you in its life.

(all laugh)

LIAM: I just rolled a 28.

MATT: Okay, that definitely hits. Attacking with your off hand?

LIAM: Oh, so this is my bonus attack?

MATT: Yeah, you get the one attack, then you get the bonus hand. Which is just dice damage.

LIAM: Okay, this is fire. My flame tongue dagger, I got two plus six is eight.

MATT: Eight?

LIAM: Eight.

MATT: All right. And your other attack? Are you doing your bonus attack?

LIAM: Was that the bonus attack? Or was that my main attack?

MATT: This is your new combat round, that was your main attack.

LIAM: That's a nine, and here comes my bonus attack. Okay, 14.

MARISHA: Kill him.

LIAM: 24.

MATT: 24 hits.

LIAM: Here comes my keen dagger. Which is an eight.

MATT: Eight damage?

LIAM: Yes.

MATT: So the first strike, you swing across with the flame tongue dagger. As it backs up, you put another gash across the front of its neck and chest area. It reels back and is looking at you with angry fury. You feel this coming shake, this horrible force of severe retribution coming to your mind, and as you're bracing for it, you take your other blade, you see its mouth opens up with frustration and anger as its tentacles kinda curl back, and just go in for the grab. You place the blade squarely into that maw, you feel the scraping of its teeth across your knuckles, but it doesn't matter, because whatever anger and light was once in its face, goes dark and dull.

(all cheer)

MATT: As immediately it crumples to the ground, lifeless, pull the blade from the maw, mind flayer down.

(all cheer)

MARISHA: Yeah Vax!

MATT: He was next, but not anymore. As it falls to the ground, all the rest of the duergar immediately have a reaction. We'll get to their turn in a second. Vex, you're up. So you're on the roof, up here right now.

SAM: Gotta get inside first.

LAURA: We have to run down in?

MATT: Run down, you're on a wooden roof surface, you heard before there's an entrance here, and an entrance there.

LIAM: Windows are swing-down-in-able.

SAM: Unless Grog can just tear through the roof.

LAURA: What was your initiative?

LIAM: It's wood.

TALIESIN: You can hold initiative.

LAURA: I guess I'll hold, I'll hold, to see what the hell's happening.

MATT: So you hold on that. It is now this dude's turn, the general. He, unaffected by this, it seems, just angrily leaps on to the table, runs across, (groans), and jumps down towards you. As he does, you see his physical form seems to enlarge. His actual small dwarvish form begins to swell, his muscles tense. He's about the size of a normal person, if not a little bigger right now. He comes at you with this giant black, jagged metal war hammer. (groans) Comes down to swing at you, as he comes down, you see it burst into flame. There's fire now surrounding the head of this war hammer as it arcs toward you.

SAM: What?

MATT: That is going to be a 24 to hit.

LIAM: Oh, it hits, but I use Uncanny Dodge to try to swoop out of the way as best I can.

MATT: All righty. You suffer–That would be… 12 plus six fire damage, so, 18, reduced to nine. You take nine damage from the strike. As it strikes down, it goes for a back swing to attack you a second time. That is going to be a 15 versus AC. This time you just dodge completely out of the way. Derge out of the way.

MARISHA: Derge.

LIAM: Er mah gerd, I derged.

(all laugh)

MATT: Percy, you're up.

TALIESIN: Just in case, I'm going to push off and wait for Grog. So I'm holding my turn.

MATT: Okay, Grog, your turn.

TRAVIS: Right, so we're on the roof of the thing, right?

MATT: Correct, you are.

TRAVIS: I'm in a rage, I take the pot still on my head, and I pick up my ax, and I draw one gigantic smash through the roof of the building.

MATT: Go ahead and make a strength check.

TALIESIN: God, yes.

ORION: This is all you're good for.

MARISHA: Yes, come on Grog. This is all you're good for.

TRAVIS: 15.

MATT: 15?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: Come on.

SAM: 15?

MATT: You bring your ax up, you bring it down on top as hard as you can, go ahead and roll ax damage.

TRAVIS: Is that a d12?

MATT: It's a d12 plus your strength modifier. Plus two 'cause you're raging.

TRAVIS: Do I get advantage on that?

MATT: No.

TRAVIS: Seven.

LAURA: Plus two 'cause you're raging.

TRAVIS: Nine.

MATT: Nine damage, okay. As you swing the ax down, slam, it hits the wood. With the sheer weight of you there, and most of you guys conglomerated at that point, the actual roof breaks open and splits, into a small space. You slide down in the process.

ASHLEY: I jump on to Grog's foot.

(all laugh)

MATT: All right. Go ahead, both of you make an acrobatics check.

ASHLEY: Oh, I wouldn't have had to do it. All right, well, I'm in the building.

TRAVIS: 21.

MATT: Acrobatics check?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MATT: Pike? You have disadvantage 'cause you're in plate armor.

ASHLEY: Six.

MATT: All right, so Grog, you manage to land on your feet. Pike, you actually plummet off and fall off to the side, right there. You are currently prone, and from the fall, which you guys both dropped down, you managed to reduce the damage, but you from the fall, you take eight points of fall damage. You are now flat on your back, the wind knocked out of you for a minute.

SAM: Pike!

ASHLEY: I'm okay, I'm okay!

SAM: Oh okay, thank God.

MATT: All right. That brings us now, Vex and Percy are the same.

TALIESIN: You first? Or should I go first?

LAURA: Let's go down at the same time.

TALIESIN: We'll go, we both jump down at the same time.

MATT: Both jump down, go ahead and make your acrobatics checks, guys.

TALIESIN: 20.

LAURA: Oh, I rolled really bad.

MATT: What did you roll?

LAURA: I rolled a two, but I add it to my acrobatics.

MATT: Yes, which is?

SAM: Which you don't know.

LAURA: Which is like, I bet.

MATT: Your acrobatics, as you're proficient in it, and you have plus five dex, so that would bring it to 11?

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: Or no, 12.

LAURA: Yes.

LIAM: Did you bring any Wheaton power from the other room?

(all laugh)

MATT: You just barely land on your feet, you do take fall damage, but you don't fall prone. You take eight points of fall damage. Percy, you manage to land fine, without any damage, on your feet. On the ground, both of you kind of three-point landing. Avengers style.

TALIESIN: Do I have time to get a shot off?

MATT: You do, that was your movement. So what's the deal?

TALIESIN: Wow, I'm taking a second, and I see that Vax is getting attacked, and I'm gonna just take a shot at the– The guy with the hammer. The biggest thing I see.

MATT: Do you have your glasses or goggles on?

TALIESIN: Yeah, that's right, I have a helmet. So yeah, I'm wearing the helmet. I'm cool with that.

MATT: So go for it.

LIAM: Do it, Starlord.

TALIESIN: Ah! A natural 20.

(all cheer)

MATT: Against the general, or one of the duergar?

TALIESIN: The general.

LIAM: The guy on the table attacking me.

MATT: Yeah, you can just barely see him, the stairway is up there.

TALIESIN: Doesn't matter, as long as I have– partial cover, it don't matter.

MATT: Right, I know, and he does have, he has three-quarters cover because of the distance, but you natural 20'd, so it doesn't matter.

TALIESIN: I can ignore it, I ignore three-quarters cover.

MATT: You do, because–

TALIESIN: I'm awesome.

MATT: Yep.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: So that's double 1d– I should have gotten some bonuses on that, I'm an idiot. Plus five. It's just double dice damage?

MATT: Double dice damage, then add your modifier.

MARISHA: Woo!

TALIESIN: That's 19 points of damage.

MATT: To the general, nice.

MARISHA: Nice.

MATT: (explosion) He gets shot in the back of the shoulderplate, you hear it ricochet and a little bit of blood begins to streak off the back of his head. He looks over his shoulder with an angry grunt, you can see now this dwarf, who's still swelling in size. It looks, (growls), an angry nostril flare. You, have your bow ready?

LAURA: I wanna do Lightning Arrow on the guy attacking my brother.

MATT: That guy there?

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: Okay, go ahead and roll to attack.

LAURA: Ugh, I don't think I hit.

MATT: What'd you roll?

LAURA: I had rolled a four.

MATT: A four, you had a plus 11 to hit, it's going to be a 15, unfortunately you miss. The arrow streaks past. Yeah, the arrow just ended up striking the wall back here and (explosion) arcs lightning throughout the wall, unfortunately does not–

LAURA: I Hunter's Mark him anyway, just for future stuff.

MATT: You used your–

LAURA: That was a bon–

MATT: You used your bonus action to cast Lightning Arrow.

LAURA: Oh! So I get a regular attack now?

MATT: Well, that was part of your regular attack, like your next arrow you fired.

LAURA: I get it.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: You're going off-book, this is cool.

MATT: I think, let me double-check real fast, just to be sure. Because I don't wanna screw you out of a cool turn.

LAURA: That is mine!

MATT: Next time bring your sheet.

LAURA: I'm sorry.

MATT: That's okay. Yeah that's a bonus action to cast lightning, into your next arrow you fire, however, you do have two attacks. So you can shoot a second time. It just isn't affected by Lightning Arrow.

LAURA: I roll 14.

MATT: That does hit, go ahead and roll damage there's 1d10, plus–

LAURA: I think it was 1d8, actually.

MATT: Oh, for the longbow? Okay, 1d8 plus five for your dex, and then plus two for the bow. Plus seven.

LAURA: Ten.

MATT: Ten damage, all right. So first arrow just streaks off, hits the wall. As he's kind of staring at Percy, he looks towards you, and as he does, the second arrow sticks into the plate, he kinda looks at it. (grunts) Just snaps it off in the armor. Grabbing his two-handed sword, or sorry, the war hammer in the other hand. Minis, it's confusing. All right, that ends your turn. Grog, the light that is beaming from your helmet currently right now is filling up the room, and it is extremely bright, most of you guys can handle it. You see all the duergar at the table like (groans), bunch of duergar come running in as well, as they run in, they're having to shield their eyes, but it's actually physically hurting them to be in that room right now. They're like (groans). Keeping it at bay, this one attempts to run in, this one's kind of making its way over. These guys here, this one's gonna go ahead and run here, this one's gonna go ahead and come to Grog. These two are gonna come up behind.

SAM: Is that guy the general?

MATT: That guy's the general, yes. This one's gonna come up behind to you. All right, they have disadvantage on their attacks.

ORION: Nice.

MATT: Because of the light.

(all cheer)

TRAVIS: 'Cause I'm so bright.

MATT: Attack against you.

MARISHA: You're the brightest tool in the shed today.

MATT: That is a 17 versus AC. You just dodge out of the way. Next one, its war pick against you, Grog.

ASHLEY: Get skinny, get skinny.

MATT: That is 20 versus AC?

TRAVIS: That hits.

MATT: That hits, all right. You take eight points of damage as it slams you with its war pick in the chest, you can feel it kind of gets about a half an inch of depth into it, but you just kind of shrug it off, and flex your muscles and it pops it out of your torso.

TRAVIS: That's cute.

MATT: The two against you. That'll be a 19 versus AC.

LAURA: Oh, yeah, that hits for sure.

MATT: And a 17 versus AC.

LAURA: That– hits.

MATT: All right, so you take two hits. That's 11 damage. And 13 damage as both of them start whaling you from behind with war picks.

LIAM: Vex'ahlia! I yell.

LAURA: 13 and what?

MATT: All right. Next up is the one that's attacking you.

SAM: Scanlan.

MATT: Scanlan, that's going to be, at a disadvantage, a 15 versus armor class.

SAM: 14.

MATT: 14? That still strikes you. You take eight points of damage from the war pick. Slamming you over the shoulder.

SAM: (yells out) Ah, I'm so awesome, Pike!

(all laugh)

MATT: That ends their go, Tiberius, you're up.

ORION: I'm still on the roof, right?

MATT: You're still on the roof, yes.

ORION: What can I see, like if I go down, what can I see?

MATT: You look through the hole, and you can see pretty much the entire battlefield. You're just up here looking down through it.

ORION: Oh, wonderful.

MATT: You're currently the only one still up there.

ORION: Yes, I think I'll stay right here, thank you very much. And how tall is the roof? How high is it? 15 feet?

MATT: It's about 25 feet up?

ORION: Okay, wonderful, wonderful. So, let me see here. This is fun.

MATT: You are technically, because I can do it.

TALIESIN: Gonna use one of the little lifties, aren't you?

MATT: I am.

MARISHA: Finally.

LIAM: Bring the fire, Tiberius.

SAM: Oh. Toys.

MARISHA: Now he's getting out toys.

TALIESIN: Aw yeah.

SAM: Come on, do something.

ORION: I'm waiting for him to do something, 'cause it's so cool.

MARISHA: I got him this for Christmas two years ago, and he's finally using it.

MATT: You are up here right now.

ORION: Awesome.

TRAVIS: Three-dimensional fighting.

LIAM: Toys, toys.

MATT: Is that visible?

TALIESIN: Yeah. Sweet D&D rave.

ORION: Okay. I'm going to– I see the two guards behind Vex, right? Is that what's going on?

MATT: Yep, right there.

ORION: And then the one duergar in front of Grog? Is that what's going on, too?

MATT: Yep, right there. Great, I will cast Grand Columns under all three of those dudes, and pin 'em. Right up against the roof. With my columns.

LIAM: Clever girl.

MATT: The?

ORION: Pillars, yes.

MATT: But those pillars only go 15 feet up.

ORION: No, they go up to 25.

MATT: 25? Oh nice.

ORION: Yeah.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: That's why I always ask that question. It does 66 bludgeoning damage when it's pinned.

ASHLEY: Bye bye.

SAM: If they don't make their save.

MATT: All right, so. Go ahead and what is your DC on that? Your spell DC?

ORION: 17.

MATT: 17, all right. All right, the heartiness of the duergar resilience gives them advantage on saves against spells. They all make their saves.

SAM: What?

MATT: But they are still up on these platforms now, raised above. So what is– Does it do any damage if they make their saves?

ORION: (reading)

SAM: Come on iPhone, come on iphone!

MARISHA: You're supposed to know everything!

SAM: iPhone five! This is the Fifth Edition.

ORION: Why doesn't it say? I guess it doesn't. It doesn't say.

MATT: So they are currently–

SAM: What is this madness?

TALIESIN: Oh, you're crazy.

ORION: Oh, wait a minute, no. You make this call. If a pillar is prevented from reaching its full height because of a ceiling or other obstacle, a creature on the pillar takes 66 bludgeoning damage and is restrained, pinched between the pillar and obstacle. The restrained creature can use an action to make a strength or dexterity check against the spell save DC. On a success they are no longer restrained, and must either move off the pole, or fall off of it. So they still, it still happens, but they're not pinned by it. Got you, okay. So go ahead and roll damage for all of them.

MARISHA: Woo!

MATT: Good to know. (sings) New spells that just got released.

LIAM: There's magic in the dwarves.

SAM: Magic in them.

LIAM: The duergar.

MARISHA: ♫ A whole new spell

TALIESIN: ♫ A fantastic way to die

MARISHA: ♫ No one can tell us no

ORION: 27 damage.

MARISHA: ♫ Except for Matt

(all laugh)

MATT: All three of the duergar are crushed.

SAM: To death?

MATT: Against the ceiling.

ORION: I did 27 damage to each one.

TRAVIS: Nice!

MATT: Splat, splat, splat, they're all slammed into the ceiling, you can see limp dwarf arms and legs now dangling out of the stone pillars that are now permanently embedding them into the ceiling.

LIAM: Yeah, son.

SAM: Crazy room!

ORION: I go like this, hah! I use two of my sorcerer points, and I cast Quicken Spell, and I look at the general, and I– Because of my books I've been tampering with, I cast Blight on his eyes. Okay. 'Cause I wanna.

(all laugh)

MATT: What's the– the DC is 17, you said?

ORION: Yes.

MATT: All right, natural 20. So he makes his save.

(all groan)

ORION: He takes 8d8 damage, and if he saves, he takes half the damage.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: 10, 15.

LIAM: They were all eights, right?

MARISHA: Well, he does all of them and then divides.

SAM: But you said half.

MARISHA: He rolls all of them and then divides.

SAM: I see.

ORION: 15 plus, what is that, ten, 14.

MARISHA: Your first one was–

ORION: 29?

MATT: So we'll say a solid 14 points of damage. All right, gotcha. No other effect, just the damage from Blight, right?

ORION: Yeah, because he made his save.

MATT: All right, Scanlan, you're up.

SAM: Oh, okay.

I'm going to, (groans).

God there's so few people to kill now.

(all laugh)

SAM: You did it all, is it just us and the general?

LAURA: Wait, that guy behind you though.

MATT: Just you guys, the general. There's a guy right behind you. Those guys got slammed.

SAM: Okay, I'm gonna cast Dominate Person on the general.

TRAVIS: (laughs) What does that do?

ORION: Oh shit.

TALIESIN: No.

LIAM: He's a power top.

MATT: With advantage, he rolled a one and a two, on the saving throw.

(all cheer)

MATT: That's ridiculous, okay.

SAM: I'm going to Dominate him and inform him, I can give him a command, right? Yes.

ORION: You can make him do whatever.

SAM: I'm going to tell him to stand down, and tell all of his allies to stand down.

MATT: All right. He turns around. Gives you a look, a strange look, he goes. “Men, all of you, drop your weapons! Now. We are surrendering to our new infiltrators.” He throws his war hammer to the ground. The rest of them all kind of look around. Go ahead and, I'm gonna have you make intimidation check on his behalf.

SAM: Okay, on his behalf?

MATT: Yes.

SAM: Do I add mine?

MATT: No, I'm just considering that, so you rolled 11?

SAM: 11.

(sings along with the music)

MATT: The three other duergar look confused, look at the dead mind flayer, look at their general telling them to surrender, and they all kinda throw their weapons to the ground, and stand there with their arms to the side, kind of waiting for what's gonna happen next. As you finish that, Clarota slowly drifts down.

SAM: Oh yeah, Clarota, thanks for all the fucking help.

(all laugh)

LAURA: Oh no. This is gonna be bad.

MATT: Clarota just kinda looks around. Says, you hear this voice in your mind go, "I had my doubts, but, well done.”

ORION: Thank you.

MATT: So. That ends that turn. Scanlan, do you want to move at all? Are you going to stay where you are?

SAM: I'm gonna stay where, well, I'm gonna move just a couple feet away from the guy right behind me, and I'm going to, as my bonus action, might as well give Grog some dice. And also just tell everyone, remember, let's not kill the general, we need him for information.

LIAM: Probably if anyone tries to hit him, he'll snap out of it, so.

SAM: That's it. I also take a little poo in my pants.

TALIESIN: Small kilo.

SAM: This is still– A battle? Even though. No combatants?

MATT: I mean, if you guys are deciding not to fight anymore, what's your plan?

MARISHA: I– Come on down and I say, good work guys. That was cool, that was great.

SAM: He's under my spell.

LAURA: Perhaps we should tie him up.

MARISHA: That's what I was gonna say, I cast Grasping Vine and I just take a vine and I tie his hands behind his back. And kind of grapple him.

SAM: So that'll break the spell.

MARISHA: Well no, I'm not damaging him, I'm just–

LIAM: Hugging him.

MARISHA: Yeah.

LAURA: Hugging him with vines.

TALIESIN: Vine hugs.

MATT: As this is happening, you guys feel a familiar tremble.

SAM: Oh no. Be quiet.

MATT: In the ground.

LIAM: DM is out of his mind.

MATT: Everyone make a stealth check.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Damn it.

ORION: Oh, that's a 20.

SAM: That is a 20.

MARISHA: (whimpers) This is the second time I rolled a one on my stealth check.

TALIESIN: Wow.

MARISHA: I'm not stealthy today.

ASHLEY: 17.

LIAM: 18.

LAURA: 19.

TRAVIS: 14.

TALIESIN: 23.

LIAM: Pretty good overall.

ORION: Two.

SAM: 22.

MATT: All right. There is the rumble, gets louder and louder, and you can see the duergar looking around nervously. The rumbling kind of fades for a second. And with a cacophonous cracking sound, the stone floor beneath you splits open.

SAM: No!

MATT: Right here.

LIAM: (groans)

MATT: Percy, make an acrobatics check and try to avoid whatever is coming through.

SAM: Whatever? It's a dragon!

TALIESIN: 18.

LIAM: It's a worm.

MATT: All right, you manage to just pull out of the way. As a large–

LAURA: What the fuck is that?

MARISHA: What is that?

MATT: A large armored four-legged creature comes bursting out of the ground around you.

ORION: Oh great, it's a rock butthole.

(all laugh)

MATT: Lets out this horrible screeching growl, has this kind of hungry look in its eyes.

MARISHA: Can I reactionary real quick, take my Grasping Vine and just lift him and kind of put him in the corner to keep the general safe?

MATT: Unfortunately, no.

ORION: Is he rooted?

MATT: He is currently–Is considered grappled.

LIAM: I have a question.

MARISHA: I was just trying to keep him safe.

LIAM: Can we take a potty break before?

SAM: A potty break? No breaks tonight!

LIAM: No breaks?

MARISHA: No breaks.

MATT: We're pushing through. You need a bottle.

MARISHA: Exercise your kegels.

MATT: If you really need to go, you can. When it's not your turn.

LIAM: No, I'm fine.

SAM: Just pee on Ashley, it's okay.

CREW: Suck it up, man.

MATT: As this entity comes burrowing up from underneath the ground, it immediately makes a strike against–

SAM: Guys, this is so exciting. And Laura has no idea what's going on.

LAURA: No clue, good times.

MATT: This is gonna be a bite attack against you, Percy. That is, all right, 24 versus armor class.

TRAVIS: Shit, bite is at 24.

TALIESIN: Yeah, that– That hits.

MATT: As you reactively attempt to move out of the way, this creature comes tearing out of the ground. Gets its bearings, rears back, and this giant, toothy maw comes clamping down onto your entire torso. You suffer 36 points of piercing damage.

SAM: Oh!

TALIESIN: The fuck?

MARISHA: 36?

MATT: 36 points of piercing damage. That's going to end its turn.

MARISHA: Shit.

MATT: Pike, you're up.

ASHLEY: Okay, well.

TALIESIN: That hurt.

ASHLEY: I'm still prone?

MATT: You are prone, you can use your movement to get back up.

ASHLEY: Okay, I use my movement to get back up. Do I also get an attack for doing that?

MATT: You still have your action, and your bonus action, it's just your move.

ASHLEY: Okay. I will use Guiding Bolt, and I'm gonna shoot that thing.

MATT: All right, go ahead and roll for the attack.

SAM: That's my girlfriend.

TRAVIS: Come on, Pike.

MARISHA: Does this guy appear to be messed up by the Daylight at all?

ASHLEY: Okay. Do I add anything?

MATT: You add your spell attack modifier, it's on your spell sheet. So the top of your spell sheet.

ASHLEY: Sorry guys. Oh sweet, okay, so. That would be 25.

MATT: That definitely hits. So, Guiding Bolt, what does that do?

ASHLEY: So I roll, where'd it go, I roll 4d6. I roll 4d6.

MATT: 4d6, go ahead and do that.

ASHLEY: Yes. 16.

MATT: 16, all right. So you reach back, clutching your holy symbol. You get back off the ground, release your hand as this suddenly flaring blast of divine energy comes cascading out of the front of your palm, blasting into the side of the face, nearly searing one of the eyes of the creature. It rears back, brings one leg up instinctually, (growls) slams the ground in the process–How you doing? That's disadvantage to your next attack.

LIAM: Aw!

ASHLEY: Wait, what are you at?

TALIESIN: I'm at 38.

MATT: It lands, puts its foot back on the ground, and kinda gears its attention towards you. It's angling around the room for what should be its next meal. Anything else you wanna do?

ASHLEY: Can I give him a healing potion? Can I heal him?

MATT: He's too far away. You could use your bonus action if you wanna use Healing Word.

ASHLEY: Okay, I'll use Healing Word.

MATT: Okay, so go ahead and roll that for him. While you're doing that, brings us–So Clarota now gets its action.

MARISHA: Yeah, Clarota!

MATT: Clarota now looks wide-eyed, seeing this happen. You hear a slight voice in the back of your head go, “This is complicating.” As it rears back, you hear the slight echoing, screeching sound, that just manages to skirt the outside of your mental capacity. You feel like if you were any closer, or if it was directed towards you, it would be a horrible ringing pain in your head. You're just peripheral to it. It makes its attack. Unfortunately, the exterior, the bulette, and/or its mind shielding is too strong, it seems to have no effect on the creature.

SAM: Damn it! Clarota, worthless!

MATT: A bulette, is the entity. That ends its turn, top of the round, Vax.

LIAM: Okay, I think, where's the laser? Here it is. It looks like I have just enough squares to go one two three. Who's this right here?

MATT: That's a duergar. Weapon on the ground, not armed right now.

LIAM: Can I get to here on a turn? I can't tell.

MATT: What's your movement?

LIAM: It's 30 feet. I'll use my bonus action to click my haste boots together.

MATT: Okay, then you can definitely do that.

LIAM: Okay, and since Percy is right up against it, I'm able to deal Sneak Attack damage, because there's another one of its foes.

MATT: Exactly, yes. You don't get an advantage on the attack, but if you attack, you do it.

LIAM: So I'm gonna try to strike him in his underbelly.

MATT: All right. Even the underbelly itself is heavily armored, you have to kind of gauge quickly where the plate is.

LIAM: 20.

MATT: 20? 20 hits. Go ahead and roll with your Sneak Attack damage.

MARISHA: So 20 hits?

LIAM: Oh, and it was–Never mind. So three. There we go. 22.

MATT: 22 damage? All righty. Got it. Cool, that brings us to– The general is going to attempt to make a saving throw.

SAM: Shit. He can do that?

MATT: Every time he gets a turn round, he gets a chance to break out of the–And he does.

SAM: Oh, he broke out?

LAURA: (gasps)

MATT: Shrugs off the mental influence of the Dominate spell. However, he is not currently armed. He uses his movement, or action to pick up the war hammer. Fury and anger is in his eyes.

MARISHA: He's still grappled.

SAM: No no, he just broke out, right?

MARISHA: Oh, from the grapple, too?

MATT: Yeah, he used his whole turn to break out of the grapple and grab its weapon, that's all he can do.

SAM: Where is he?

MATT: Right there.

LIAM: To fight the bulette? Or to–

MATT: You have no idea.

LIAM: Oh, we don't know, oh. He could just be reacting to the bulette.

MATT: The flames on the hammer are out too. But it picks up the war hammer, it's cold black steel currently.

TRAVIS: We got our Davy Jones in the room, he'll take care of the dwarves.

MATT: That brings us to…Grog.

TRAVIS: (groans) Kitty! I would like to go into a frenzied rage, and charge at Clifford the big red dog.

(all laugh)

MATT: You leap off the higher platofrm, come rushing out with your ax in the air, as you come down using the full weight of your body behind the attack, go ahead and roll your three attacks.

TRAVIS: All right, I have nine, eight, 17.

SAM: You have one dice from me. I've inspired you.

TRAVIS: Oh.

SAM: (singing) Grog. Grog.

TRAVIS: Is it a 20 or is it a what?

MATT: You get to add a d8 to an attack roll.

SAM: If you have a shitty attack roll, add a d8 to it, if you have a shitty roll.

TRAVIS: 17.

ORION: Grog, smash right through his plate thingy.

MATT: Barely hits.

TRAVIS: 19.

MATT: Hits, all three attacks hit.

TRAVIS: Yeah, that one hits, 16 plus eight.

MATT: So all three attacks hit, roll damage for three hits. As you come now, just slamming your grey ax, into the side of this armored beast, just over and over again. Cleaving this nice little wide section of its armor on the side.

LIAM: Take his fucking head off.

TRAVIS: 14. 21. 21 again.

ASHLEY: What?

TRAVIS: 22.

LAURA: Oh, so. 22, 21, and 14.

SAM: Whoa.

LAURA: I was doing his math.

(all laugh)

MATT: 21, 22, and 14 you said?

ASHLEY: 57?

SAM: 57.

TRAVIS: I don't wanna do math and show you all up.

LIAM: That's a level nine barbarian.

MATT: So, slam him, you see a portion of its side armor splits, you can see a little bit of that dark red, fleshy interior. You do a significant amount of damage, and leave a nice little weak point in its armor. However, it still doesn't seem to be entirely phased by the damage, it just kinda shrugs at the damage, and kinda glares at you for a second. One of its eyes that was focused on Percy and Keyleth, now looks over at you Jurassic-Park style, with the t-rex up at the side of the vehicle. Vex?

LAURA: I back up a little bit. Yeah, like that. And I'm gonna cast Hail of Thorns on him.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: Sounds nasty.

LAURA: Right? I'm gonna shoot like a regular attack.

MATT: So your bonus action to cast Hail of Thorns, and then you attack with the arrow, go for it.

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: You're adding 11 to it.

LAURA: Okay, good, then that'd be 18.

MATT: 18? 18 hits.

LAURA: Yes, so I was casting that as a level three spell. I roll 3d– that means I roll 3d10.

MATT: Against the creature?

LAURA: Against 14 which is my spell level thingy.

TRAVIS: 3d10.

LAURA: Yeah, 1d10 for damage.

MATT: Yep, go for it.

LAURA: That is an eight-sided dice, yay!

MATT: There yougo.

LAURA: An eight.

MATT: That'd be 25.

LAURA: I get another attack, so I'm gonna do that. Natural 20!

(all cheer)

MATT: Nice, all right, go ahead and roll damage, double the dice and add your modifier of seven.

LIAM: That arrow just went slow mo.

LAURA: Double the dice. 15.

MATT: 15, all right. So what happens here is you pull an arrow out, as you whisper a couple of words under your breath, you see all these thorny spikes being to shoot out the shaft of the arrow. You release it and as it strikes in the front of its face, the arrow actually splinters, sending a bunch of these thorns all over its torso, piercing an inch or two into its armor with each blast of these thorns. It kinda rears back and tries to shake itself off. As it does, you get a little bit of a look as Grog backs away from it, checking to see the wound he left. You take your secondary arrow, aim for the red soft spot, boom, slips right past the armor plating, doing the extra damage on the interior of its physical self. Awesome, that's your turn I believe.

ASHLEY: Good turn.

MATT: Percy, you're up.

TALIESIN: Okay, is my hand still stuck in its mouth?

(all laugh)

TALIESIN (CONT'D): I would like it to be.

MATT: If you'd like to, yeah, you could've left it there.

TALIESIN: Do I have an advantage to hit if my gun is in its mouth?

(all laugh)

MATT: You are considered grappled if you leave your hand there. You can remain grappled for advantage on the attack roll.

TALIESIN: Done. So I get to roll twice?

MATT: You do.

MARISHA: This is a whole new meaning to point-blank.

TALIESIN: 19.

MATT: 19, that'll hit.

TALIESIN: Okay, I spent some grit on this, and did some interesting modifiers.

MATT: How much grit did you spend?

TALIESIN: Two points of grit.

MATT: Okay, this is the–

TALIESIN: The Deadshot. And I also took a negative five hit for a plus ten damage to this shot, and I'm using my fire modifier. I'm just being an asshole.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: That's amazing.

TALIESIN: That's… 16 and 20, 35 points of fire damage inside of its mouth.

MATT: So, your hand inside, you pull back and fire, knowing which barrel is next. You hear this dull(muffled explosion) sound, and its eyes kinda pulse for a second, in intense fury and pain, smoke just billows out the sides of its mouth, and its nostrils, and it begins to kind of shake its head, lifting you about a foot off the ground, painfully, but you think it's worth the deal. Well done.

TALIESIN: Thank you.

LIAM: Aw man.

MATT: I will say that ends your turn.

LIAM: Thank you Gary Gygax, wherever you are.

(all laugh)

MATT: All right. The duergar, currently seeing the situation, and the change of tone, go and grab their weapons.

TRAVIS: Change of tone.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS (CONT'D): Shit got real.

MATT: This duergar is going to move up, back to you, Scanlan, as it sees that you were the one that took over the general.

SAM: Dicks, bring it.

LIAM: Dicks.

MATT: This one comes rushing in.

MARISHA: Aw, come on.

LIAM: Freakin' tank in the room.

MARISHA: There's a bigger problem, bro.

MATT: Opportunists, man. It rushes after you, actually.

LIAM: ♫ Why can't we be friends

ALL: ♫ Why can't we be friends

MATT: All right, the attack against you, Scanlan. That is gonna be a 17 versus AC. All right, this one is actually also physically growing in size as it comes towards you.

SAM: It's getting hard.

(all laugh)

MATT: You suffer 16 points of damage.

ORION: Such a bummer.

MATT: As the war pick comes slamming into your side. You see it's coming, but you're just not fast enough. It hits you, on impact, it may have cracked a rib, you're not sure. The one that's coming up against you, rolls, that's going to be a 17 versus armor class.

LIAM: Fuck you.

MATT: You see it and just duck out of the way, its war pick slams into the stone wall next to you, with a horrible screeching stone sound. High-AC rogue, yo. All right that ends their turn, Tiberius, you're up.

ORION: I'm looking in, I'm like, oh, that's no good. I look at where he made the crack in the armor, where is that, is that in the head?

MATT: It's in the head area, right over here.

ORION: Right, awesome. I'm going to kind of motion towards the mind flayer, and give a telepathic wink.

MATT: It is on the ground.

ORION: Yeah.

SAM: Are you flirting with it?

MATT: You make a telepathic wink.

ORION: And I'm going to cast Telekinesis, and I'm going to pry open the metal. I'm not going to target the creature, I'm going to target the armor.

TRAVIS: Nice.

MATT: Interesting thought, okay. See if it– the 17 is the DC?

ORION: Yes.

TRAVIS: This could be cool.

MATT: All right, it fails. So here's what happens. For the effect of this. It suffers, I'm gonna say it suffers about 2d6 points of damage from the tearing. So go ahead and roll that.

ORION: Six damage.

MATT: So six damage, however, you have effectively reduced its armor class by five.

TRAVIS: Yes!

MATT: In doing so.

SAM: Ooh!

ORION: And I'm going to spend two more sorcery points, and do the spell again. I'm going to do a– I'm gonna do Firebolt, right in the hole. And I'm going to use my metamagic wand to fire the spell.

MARISHA: Fire in the hole!

MATT: All right, go for it!

SAM: He has so many dice, it's crazy.

ORION: Oh, that hits.

TALIESIN: Actually, does that crit? Does your 19 crit?

MATT: No. Usually, 20 is only crit, except for, I think he has a bonus ability.

SAM: Critical Role by the way, name of the show.

(all laugh)

MATT: It's okay, you're good, and you're a fighter, which means eventually you'll end up with four attacks per round anyway, so you're fine.

ORION: Can't do that.

TALIESIN: I'm looking forward to it.

MATT: Damage, what you got? Scanlan, you're on deck, by the way.

SAM: I'm ready.

ORION: I zap him, I zap him for one.

MATT: Okay.

(all laugh)

ORION: No, no no no, I empowered it. Full, it takes ten damage. 'Cause I empowered the spell.

MATT: That's correct, so. As you pull down with the ray, it streaks down across the ceiling portion of the building, right into the fleshy, exposed part of its armor, now it looks like it has this giant jagged scar in the side of its head, where you can see muscle and sinew pulsing with each of its movements. You blast into it, you can see this darkened black portion of its interior flesh, it's now charred, slight embers beginning to percolate and burn on the outskirts of the impact. Well done, you gonna stay where you are?

ORION: Yes.

MATT: Scanlan, what you got?

SAM: Okay, I'm going, I know he'll get a hit on me, but I'm gonna run away from the guy behind me, run straight at the general, and just open out my arms in an outstretched big hug, and I'm like, come here big guy, come here! And I give him a big hug, and upon touching him, I cast Banishment on him and send him to another dimension.

ORION: Nice!

MATT: All right.

(all laugh)

MATT (CONT'D): As you move away, the duergar is going to attempt to make, as a reaction, to make an attack on you.

SAM: It's okay, it's all cool for Pike.

MATT: That's going to be a 13 versus armor class.

SAM: Does not hit.

MATT: You hear it coming, as you're walking, “buddy!”

(all laugh)

MATT (CONT'D): Duck under a war pick. With advantage on its saving throw. What's the DC?

SAM: DC?

MATT: The DC on your spell?

SAM: Well, if I'm doing it through my cone, it's 19.

MATT: I will say for this, you do not have it through your cone, because you had your arms open, you didn't specify, however, it still fails it's saving throw. The general, as you reach up, he has his war pick ready. Pulls back its war pick as the flames burst in.

(all laugh)

MATT (CONT'D): Then blinks out of existence.

(all cheer)

ORION: Nice move.

ASHLEY: One down, one down.

SAM: Oh, he's gone, oh, where did he go? I don't know.

MATT: How long does it last, by the way?

SAM: It's concentration.

(all laugh)

MATT: Okay. All right.

LIAM: Scanlan Shorthalt, playing Vegas, ladies and gentlemen.

SAM: Do I get a bonus?

MATT: You do get a bonus action.

SAM: Okay, I'm just going to sing a little ditty to Pike, just to give her a little inspiration. I'll just do some pelvic thrusting– a little (guitar), that's a flute, by the way.

(all laugh)

ORION: Super, play that thing.

MATT: His electric flute gives you a d8 inspiration dice, so you can add that to any attack rolls.

LIAM: He can do anything with any instrument.

ASHLEY: Sweet licks on your flute.

(all laugh)

MATT: All right, so, Keyleth.

MARISHA: So, upon seeing this big thing crash in, and I'm like, oh. Now you're really angry. But I just kind of analyze him and I say okay, and then I go, (grunts), and I turn into a rhinoceros.

ALL: Ooh!

MATT: Okay, I don't have a rhinoceros mini on me, so we'll use a bear for the time being, but we'll know it's a rhinoceros.

SAM: Why don't you have a rhinoceros?

MATT: 'Cause I was not prepared for such things.

LIAM: Way to slack off, Mercer.

MATT: Hey, I'm gonna order a rhinoceros now, you happy? I'm gonna go to Toys R Us.

TALIESIN: Get the whole animal collection. Actually got them, the whole set.

MATT: So you transform into a rhinoceros, now basically facing an armored beast with an armored beast.

MARISHA: Kaiju battle.

(all laugh)

MATT: Whatcha got, whatcha doing?

MARISHA: I'm charging him.

TRAVIS: Activity in the Breach.

MATT: You leap down, go in for the attack, this duergar already used its reaction, so it can't attack you.

MARISHA: So if he fails to save, I knock him over. That's plus seven, so 19?

MATT: 19 does hit.

MARISHA: Awesome!

MATT: Does save though, is not knocked over.

MARISHA: A strength save?

MATT: Yeah.

MARISHA: Aw, damn it.

MATT: This is a big creature.

MARISHA: He does, I do 2d8 of bludgeoning damage.

MATT: Go for it.

MARISHA: Seven, nine, 14 damage.

MATT: 14 damage, all right. You have multi attack or did you get the one hit?

MARISHA: Well, I charged, yeah.

MATT: Okay yeah, so the charge is the hit. But you slam into it, your horn gores, you can see actually, you slam it into the side of the armor wound that Grog left and then Tiberius pried open. Part of it gets pulled back, and you see a quick splatter of some sort of bloody splash as you're staring to actually pull apart its interior. The horn is jabbed in there, and it manages to shrug it off at the last point. You do significant gore to its side.

LIAM: Good musical riff.

MARISHA: Oh, wait. No no no, that's right, keep going. It's actually 15 damage. I always forget that I have a plus one to attack.

MATT: 15? Yeah, don't forget that. You need to remember that. After taking the arrow wound, and after everyone else attacking around it, it's going to try and get a different situation. It's going to jump. It rears back, and leaps into the air.

SAM: Oh jesus.

MATT: Landing right on top of Clarota and Scanlan.

SAM: Oh no!

ASHLEY: Wait, does he get, do we get–

MATT: You guys all get attacks on it as it jumps away.

MARISHA: We all get attacks?

MATT: Yes, you do.

SAM: Do I?

MATT: No, you do not.

MARISHA: We get advantage, right?

MATT: No.

TALIESIN: Did he take me, no he didn't take me.

MATT: No, actually, you are still in its hand. In its mouth, it carries you with it.

MARISHA: 19.

MATT: Okay, so 19, you hit.

LIAM: 24.

MATT: Hit.

TRAVIS: 26.

MATT: Hit. No, it's the three of you, so that's it. So all of you guys just roll damage for a basic attack.

SAM: Come on, kill him before he gets to me.

TRAVIS: 24.

MATT: 24 damage? 24 damage you said? Nice.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

ASHLEY: Was I close enough to him to get an attack?

MATT: No you weren't, unfortunately.

LIAM: 11.

MATT: 11, all righty, and?

MARISHA: 17.

ASHLEY: Yeah.

MATT: So, as it lands. All of you guys have to make a strength or dex saving throw, your choice. For Percy.

TALIESIN: Dex.

MATT: And Scanlan, and I'm rolling for Clarota. Clarota fails.

TALIESIN: 20.

MATT: It's okay, it's okay, Scanlan. It's okay, you can do this.

MATT: What'd you roll?

TALIESIN: 20.

SAM: He's coming back from the other dimension. I rolled a nine.

ORION: Did it hit the floor or did you go again?

SAM: No, I used the one that rolled on the floor.

LAURA: Roll it on the table, that doesn't count.

MATT: So Clarota is not prone.

SAM: Dungeon Master, does a roll on the floor count? What happened?

MATT: I usually roll on the table. I usually prefer to roll on the table.

SAM: It's even worse.

(all laugh)

LIAM: That'll learn ya.

MATT: You guys are knocked prone on the ground, and you all take 14 points of bludgeoning damage, plus 14 points of slashing damage. As he just lands on top of you. Yeah, so 28 points of damage, as it crushes you, and its claws sink into you. Clarota takes the same.

LIAM: Did it drag Percy through the air?

TALIESIN: Yes it did.

LAURA: It did?

TALIESIN: My arms are still stuck in its mouth.

MATT: You're not knocked prone, but you do take 14 points of crushing damage, as its mouth bites down on your arm again, for free.

TALIESIN: That's fine.

MATT: It's going to actually release you, Percy. So you're there.

MARISHA: Think your arm might be a bit busted.

MATT: It turns, and makes a bite attack against Scanlan.

SAM: As he does, I distract him.

(air horn blowing)

(all laugh)

SAM: Playing my shawm.

MATT: That's the sound a shawm makes?

SAM: Cutting Words reaction.

MATT: Okay, so as your reaction, go ahead and do that, so roll the d8.

ASHLEY: (imitates horn)

TRAVIS: It's like the start of a Pitbull song.

SAM: Six.

MATT: Okay, he rolled a 27. Reduced it by seven to 19. So even with the reduction, it's not enough, you're on the ground. It sinks its teeth right into you. You take, let's see.

LIAM: These games keep getting better.

MATT: You take 41 points of piercing damage.

LAURA: Oh my gosh.

LIAM: Scanlan!

SAM: No worries, I'm just at negative 36 now.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Really?

SAM: Yep.

MATT: Okay, so.

MARISHA: Wait, how did that happen?

TALIESIN: That happened fast.

LIAM: He's unconscious, he's in bad shape, but we're gonna get him.

MATT: Scanlan's looking rough, Scanlan is now just being thrashed around in the mouth of the creature.

TRAVIS: How many hit points do you have?

MATT: His limp arms and legs just (thumping) as it's kind of just running him around and across the air.

LIAM: Hashtag save Scanlan. Strings of gnome blood are being flung across the room.

LIAM: Oh, he's so little though, he's so little.

MATT: Pike, your turn.

ASHLEY: Okay, so time for a Cure Wounds. So I guess. Let's see.

MATT: You can't even see him right now. If you want to Cure Wounds, you have to touch him.

ASHLEY: I'll go, yeah, I'll go.

SAM: I'm being thrashed around.

ASHLEY: Can I just go, he's over there?

LAURA: He's in the mouth of the thing.

LIAM: She's 25 speed.

MATT: So you can move five squares.

ASHLEY: Okay.

MARISHA: Didn't you get that speed boost?

ASHLEY: How close can I get to him? I can't see the lines in the squares.

ORION: Don't forget your boots, Pike.

ASHLEY: Oh, I have sprinter's boots! I have sprinter's boots. Okay, so I'm gonna use my sprinter's boots. I can– While you wear these boots, you can use a bonus action, and click the boots' heels together, if you do, the boots double your walking speed for one minute.

MATT: So you can move ten squares, takes your bonus action.

ASHLEY: So then, I'm so sorry, I can't see the squares. So if I can get ten to get over there.

MATT: So you go one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, there is a ledge there, and he's blocking the way up, so nine, ten, make an acrobatics check to actually jump and climb up onto the–

LAURA: Oh no.

MATT: With disadvantage, 'cause you have plate armor.

LIAM: But what about her–

MATT: Disadvantage, you roll twice and take a lower.

ASHLEY: Wait, wait, hold on. Can I cast Guided Strike? Which adds ten to–

SAM: I gave you a dice. I gave you a dice.

LIAM: Which means you're–Ten.

MATT: Total of ten?

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: That's exactly what you needed.

(all cheer)

MATT: That was the baseline. You run up, it takes all the strength you can feel, you're gonna be sore in the morning. All your muscles tense as you pull yourself up, with all the inertia from the run, your parkour up to the top, land, Scanlan's there, currently being flung around, you manage to reach up and grab him, and get in a brief tug of war with the bulette creature.

ASHLEY: Hey, get away from him, man!

MATT: As you cast Cure Wounds. Go ahead and–

ASHLEY: So that's Mass Cure Wounds, so does that heal–

MATT: Is it Mass Cure Wounds, or just doing Cure Wounds?

ASHLEY: I'll just do Cure Wounds.

MATT: So at what level are you using?

SAM: Don't chintz out.

ASHLEY: I'm gonna use it at the highest– I'll use it at fifth level.

SAM: Cast whatever you can cast.

LIAM: It's one or multiple people.

SAM: Can you do it at a higher level?

ASHLEY: Yeah, I'll do it at my highest level that I can cast, which is–

SAM: Let's not cheap out on Scanlan here.

ASHLEY: Sorry guys, I'm just warming up again.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Let's not skimp on Scanlan.

LIAM: Remember when I brought you back from the dead? Remember that? Remember that?

SAM: Remember when my kiss healed you from death? Just throwing that out there.

ASHLEY: – which I think is eight.

MATT: So it's 5d8 plus five 5d8 plus five is how much you're healing him.

LIAM: You're gonna be all right.

ASHLEY: My spell attack bonus, plus eight?

MATT: You don't have to worry about the bonus, you're just touching him.

ASHLEY: So 5d8 plus five.

MATT: Is what you're healing him, yes. All right.

SAM: That's three.

LIAM: I think you did it four times, yeah.

ASHLEY: 18, plus five.

SAM: I thought that was three, no?

ASHLEY: Yeah, 23, 23.

SAM: Plus five.

LIAM: That was plus five.

LAURA: Are you still unconscious?

SAM: But now I'm only negative 11.

ASHLEY: Wait, what?

SAM: I've taken almost 100 points of damage in this.

MATT: You're unconscious, how it works in this, and this is different from Pathfinder–Yeah, you go to zero and you stay there. You are now up to 23.

LIAM: You don't go below zero, you hit zero, and you're there, making rolls to see if you die.

LAURA: You only have three chances if you roll, fail, three times, you die.

MATT: And if something hits you while you're unconscious, it's an automatic fail. Now you're 23 hit points.

SAM: Hey, I feel great, guys!

(all laugh)

MATT: You're still in its mouth being shook around.

SAM: Oh shit!

(all laugh)

SAM (CONT'D): What is this ride? This is crazy!

MATT: Pike, that's your turn.

ASHLEY: I can't do anything else, right?

MATT: Clarota's going to get up.

LIAM: Come on Clarota, show us what you got.

MATT: Clarota looks pretty rough. Rears back.

LIAM: Got to bring that mental power and that arcane magic, let's do it.

MATT: Taking a cue from the opening you left, Clarota pulls back its hand, you see a familiar spark of bluish electrical energy as Clarota reaches for unleashing a torrent of electrical arcane energy forward, into the form of a Lightning Bolt. Blasting across the bow of this giant creature. Let's see. Does not make its saving throw, so it's 32 points of lightning damage.

LAURA: Clarota!

MATT: As the back of its armor is now seared, and you can see parts of its armored flesh are kind of blackened and charred and slightly crimping. Vax, you're up.

LIAM: Okay, so I've got enough room to run up to its anus, which I'll do.

TRAVIS: As you always do.

LIAM: It's got plenty of people around, so that means I can Sneak Attack him.

MATT: As you rush past, before you attack? This duergar that was right by you, that has currently grown to a larger size gets a free swing at you.

LIAM: Ain't no thing.

MATT: That's going to be a 21 to hit.

LIAM: Okay, that hits.

MATT: All right, with its war pike it takes–deals 14 points of damage to you.

LIAM: Who cares, I'm saving my gnome friend, okay. Here I go. 14, it's a 25 to hit his butt.

MATT: 25 hits.

LIAM: This is my keen dagger, with vorpal blade, two plus seven is nine, that's just nine. Where's a pencil, that's a pencil. And then we add my Sneak Attack damage, which is six, seven, ten. 15. 21, plus nine, is 30.

MATT: All right, nice.

LIAM: To the butt. Specifically to the butt.

MATT: As you rush up, you take a moment as it's thrashing about, and you can see what looks, anatomy-wise, to be probably where it expels whatever it eats.

LIAM: The hole? Right in there.

MATT: You go ahead and just slash and eviscerate there.

LIAM: How do you like me now?

MATT: Even back there it's heavily armored, it takes, you carve through, and it–You've definitely left a lasting impression on this bulette.

LIAM: Pucker up, baby, pucker up.

SAM: Hashtag, armored anus.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: What, what, in the butt.

LIAM: This is D&D in 2015, people, 2015. So that's the first attack, right? Now I get a second attack?

MATT: The general also, by the way, appears as the concentration spell was lost as you were unconscious.

SAM: I must have stopped concentrating for some reason.

MATT: However, it is right in front of, it's like. It's now in his face.

LIAM: Second attack. 22.

MATT: That hits. Okay, and that's a four plus ten, ten points of fire-based damage to the butt.

MATT: All right.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Preparation H? Fire damage to the anus.

MATT: That brings us to his turn.

LAURA: The general's?

MATT: The general's turn, who now is there from the bulette, sees it, looks over and sees you.

TRAVIS: It's right in front of him!

MATT: Kind of sitting there with your bloody hand. It's still flaming, swings back, and goes for your head.

TALIESIN: God.

MATT: That is a 23 versus armor class.

TALIESIN: Ah, yeah, that's gonna hit. Armor class sucks.

MATT: Plus the fire damage.

ASHLEY: What are you at?

TALIESIN: I'm at 39 I wanna say?

MATT: Well, you take 31 points of damage. Including the fire damage from the pike, it goes for its second attack against you.

TRAVIS: This thing sucks.

MATT: That's gonna be a 22 versus armor class.

TALIESIN: That's gonna hit.

LIAM: It's a tank.

TRAVIS: One.

MATT: You take… That's gonna be 21 points of damage.

TALIESIN: I'm out.

MATT: Okay, Percy being pummeled and pummeled again. Loses, your gun falls from your hand, as you slump to the ground, your eyes roll back, unconsciousness and darkness.

SAM: We're droppin' like flies!

MATT: Taking you. That brings us to–

ASHLEY: Everybody knows shit's fucked.

MATT: Grog.

TRAVIS: What, me? Bah! How tall is the thing?

MATT: Tall? I'd say it's probably about… 20 feet tall? 15, 20 feet tall?

TRAVIS: Can I climb up on its back?

MATT: It's not your size, it'd be really, really tight, pinning in there.

TRAVIS: I would like to run up to its right side and flank it.

MATT: Over here?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MATT: So you run around. Which you can do, 'cause you're a freaking barbarian.

TRAVIS: (snarls)

MATT: All right, go ahead, you're making your attacks. Go for it, three strikes against it.

TRAVIS: 21. Hits, right?

MATT: 21 definitely hits.

TRAVIS: 16 plus eight, hits.

MATT: Definitely hits.

TRAVIS: Natural 20!

(all cheer)

TRAVIS: Does that mean I get extra?

LIAM: Double damage, it means double damage.

TRAVIS: Oh, double damage, okay.

MATT: So first strike.

ASHLEY: Kill him, kill him, kill him!

TRAVIS: 16?

MATT: 16 damage?

TRAVIS: Yes.

LAURA: 21.

TRAVIS: 21, thank you.

LIAM: Stay in school, kids.

TRAVIS: Stay on the table.

MATT: It's the critical now, so double the dice roll.

TRAVIS: 20, thank you, and. 15, plus that, 20.

MATT: You double the dice, then add the modifier.

TRAVIS: Oh, double the second one.

LAURA: So that's 40 on the last one.

SAM: Jesus.

LAURA: So 61, 76.

MATT: How do you want to do this, Grog?

(all cheer)

ASHLEY: Oh, you killed him?

LIAM: Yes!

MATT: How you wanna do this, Grog?

TRAVIS: I would like to chop down into the fleshy bit, and after I've sliced–

MATT: The fleshy bit is on the opposite side, by the way. So you're now at an unarmored side. However, it's still holding Scanlan in its mouth, shaking him around, so, how do you wanna finish it?

TRAVIS: Can I get to its mouth at all?

MATT: I could say for the flavor of this, yeah, you manage to just barely make it over here.

TRAVIS: I would like to swing through and catch the corner of its mouth, open its mouth wide, and then I'd like to reach in, and with my teeth, pull its fucking tongue out of its head, and start thrashing it side to side.

(all laugh)

MATT: First you rush up with your ax, using all of the aggression, you take it and swing it, barely leaving you with a shave. You gash the side of its mouth, and draw this giant wound open. As it does, you actually snap, and cut through the tendons that clench the jaw, causing it to fall open and slack. Scanlan spills out of its mouth, hitting the ground with a dull thud. As its mouth is now open, it kind of rears back. You shake your head angrily, as the froth is gathering at the corners of your mouth. You drop your ax from one hand, grab the jaw, reach in, bite down on its giant meaty tongue. Using your hand at the back of it, you pull and yank and you feel the muscle tearing and tensing before, eventually it comes free, and is now dangling about 25, 30 pounds, of very very wet, tongue meat. With your third attack, how do you finish it?

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: What do you after you're biting its tongue in your mouth?

MATT: That's what I'm asking.

TRAVIS: That's a good point.

MATT: It's looking really rough, but you still need to get that final death blow. What are you doing with this, Grog?

ASHLEY: Rip him apart.

TRAVIS: Yeah, I'm gonna King Kong his jaw. I'm gonna take the broken part, the top of his head, and just pull apart.

MATT: Okay, so you drop your ax entirely, the tongue still dangling from your mouth. You reach and put one foot up into the bottom of the jaw, using your other hands you push and push, you hear it crack, and pull, as it tenses and is trying to push down. It has no tension because the jaw was destroyed. You pull back and hear a sickening snap, as the armor plate buckles underneath where the neck joint would be on such a creature. Its eyes kinda roll back for a second, and it begins to slacken. As it does, you reach up with your fist, and penetrate the bottom of where its brain would be. With a sickening (suction) sound, it goes entirely limp and collapses on the ground.

LIAM: And that's why you're on the team.

(all cheer)

TRAVIS: And as it falls, the tongue that's hanging in my mouth, I look to one of the dwarves that's left, I go, who's next?

(all laugh)

MATT: We're gonna end it there for the night.

(all groan)

MATT: Damn guys, well done.

TALIESIN: I'm sleeping.

SAM: Oh, Percy's dead, hashtag save Percy.

LAURA: I want more chicken.

MATT: Before we finish, I'd say go ahead and throw a heal up on him.

MARISHA: Oh yeah.

TALIESIN: Thank you.

ASHLEY: Good plan.

MATT: It's nasty, man. You guys picked that, by the way.

LAURA: Oh seriously?

TRAVIS: They did? You dicks!

TALIESIN: You suck.

ZAC: That was the chat room.

ORION: Try harder next time.

MATT: We'll be doing more of those as time goes on. Not all the time, but whenever I have the opportunity to put it in there, I'm gonna start asking for you guys to help me figure out what to throw at these adventurers.

LIAM: You sadists.

(all laugh)

ZAC: We shouldn't tell them the other options, should we, just in case we wanna save them.

MATT: Oh no, they'll come back in, don't worry.

ASHLEY: 25.

TALIESIN: Oh wow, I feel much better.
Announcements and Break

ZAC: So you guys, we're gonna be doing a Q and A.

MATT: Yeah, for anyone who wants to stay over.

ZAC: Anyone who wants to stick around, the audience has a ton of questions for you guys. For the audience, it's a sub-only Q and A, so if you're been wondering whether or not you should sub, let me give you some reasons why. Number one, you can ask these guys questions in a little bit. Number two, every 50 subs, we're giving away tabletop promo kits that are like $250 worth of special stuff, and we will ship that internationally, doesn't matter. Even in Antarctica. We want someone in Antarctica to do tabletop day, do you know anyone?

MATT: I don't.

ZAC: We had someone last year.

MATT: Well shit, we gotta reach out then.

ZAC: They're gone, they were like the only people there, and they're gone.

MATT: There's nobody there left, they were the last bastion. Well, somebody needs to move to Antarctica in the next few days and let us know, so then we can totally use that.

ZAC: We also do a Minecraft server, for subs only, but if you want in on that, there's no automated message for that server info, so just make sure and message the Geek & Sundry account, and we'll get you that sub IP address for the Minecraft server. I know we have more, there's lots more stuff. We do some other sub-only chats throughout the week. lots of emotes, other fun stuff. But we're gonna go ahead and roll some videos while we get set up for the Q and A. This was a lot of fun, oh! I would like to challenge you guys to do a quick little donation drive for the charity that you guys support.

MATT: Yeah, for 826LA. Had it going up in the chat room, if you have the opportunity, you wanna help support these children getting side educations and tutoring.

ZAC: You guys wanna tell them about, just to get them psyched up for it? 'Cause we can get that command going.

MARISHA: Yeah, 826LA, they're a non-profit organization that helps primarily with literacy and creative story children for children between the ages of like five and 18. They have a really great young authors book that you can buy that's a collection of all of the kids' book, and you can also go and check out the time travel mart, there's one in Echo Park and then there's also one in Marina Del Rey. But you should just google 826, 'cause I know there's one in Seattle, I know there's one in like Atlanta. New York, San Francisco. There might be an 826 in your city.

LIAM: 826LA probably, right?

MARISHA: 826LA is who we're raising money for. But yeah all of the 826 store fronts are a little bit different, depending on where you go. They're super cool.

MATT: Guys, please, check it out, it's awesome. It's a good group of people, what they do is fantastic. If you have the opportunity please do, go ahead and donate to the charity.

MATT: Well, thank you guys so much for tuning in for the fourth episode of Critical Role, with the grand return of Pike, our cleric.

(all laugh)

MATT: Necessary. Glad to have you back, I'm sure everyone here is glad to have the healer back.

LAURA: Especially today.

TALIESIN: Very happy today.

MATT: And a surprise return of Laura, so.

LAURA: What a time to join the game.

MATT: Heck yeah. All right guys, well, we're gonna take a little bit to set up for the Q and A. Those who can stay, feel free to, those who can't, totally understand. We have kids and families to get to. Those who can will be here for the Q and A for the next hour or so.

ZAC: One more thing, just so they know we're following through. We have the picture for you guys to sign. So Niareth won this, when we reached 1,000 subs, so I think Pike is all that's left for that.

MATT: Pike is left to sign this Player's Handbook.

SAM: I haven't signed it.

ZAC: And then we've got the picture. So we'll pass that around while we're doing the set up.

MATT: Do any of you have the gold marker?

ZAC: I'll find it.

MATT: All right, cool. Yeah guys we're gonna go ahead and set up for this, we'll see you in a little bit for the Q and A, thank you everyone for watching. Thanks guys. Awesome day at Critical Role, thanks.

ASHLEY: Bye!

WIL: Hey nerds, I'm Wil Wheaton, I know right? And guess what? It is back. International Tabletop Day has returned, this year on April 11th. What is that, you say? What is Tabletop Day? Well, if you don't know, then shame on you. International Tabletop Day is a worldwide celebration dedicated to the tabletop games we love to play with the people we love. People we like, people we've never even met before, it doesn't matter, last year we had over 3,000 registered events across seven continents and over 80 countries, that is amazing! But this year we're going to make it even bigger. “Will Wheaton, how can we make it even bigger than last year?” That's what she said. Start now. Trend #TabletopDay on Twitter, because that was awesome. Broadcast your plans on the internet, make a video, share pictures, start a blog, create a dating profile for other sexy gamers in your area, whatever you want. Celebrate it in your own way, but we wanna hear from you. Be sure to use #TabletopDay, or @TabletopDay to let us know. It is up to you, world. Visit TabletopDay.com to register your event, or find one near you. You can also download exclusive content and check out some of our favorite games. We will be streaming our own live event, here in Los Angeles for you to watch. And there will be more on that soon. You love tabletop games, and we love you, so join us in the global celebration, on April 11th. Play more games. Hey everybody, I'm Wil Wheaton, and I am coming to you semi-live from the Twitch TV set here at the Geek & Sundry stages in beautiful downtown Burbank, California. I am here to tell you everything you ever wanted to know about Tabletop's RPG show, coming this June, but were afraid to ask. Or have been asking for close to a year and I've been saying, “We'll tell you at some point in the future.” You can consider this the big announcement. It was incredibly difficult to cast this show. We needed people who were very comfortable improvising, who had experience playing role playing games, and who were available when we planned to shoot the show. It was surprisingly difficult to get a pool of people who fit all of those criteria, and choose the most awesome among them. So your cast playing in this wonderful show are: Yuri Lowenthal, Laura Bailey, Hank Green, and Alison Haislip. I'm really excited to have these people all together. They're all my friends, they are all wonderful storytellers, and they are going to be a tremendous party of adventurers. I'm only gonna try to kill them a little bit.

The most frequently asked question since I announced that there was going to be a Tabletop RPG show is, hey Wil Wheaton! Why are you so awesome? The second most frequently asked question is, what system are you using to power this game? First and foremost, I needed a system that was going to support the way I play roleplaying games, and that is telling a story collaboratively with a group of players with me as the GM. I looked at some very well known systems like Dungeons & Dragons, and Savage Worlds, I looked at systems that I love, like Fate Core, and I even looked at the True 20, a d20 modern system. And I really wanted to use something that was released by an independent publisher. I wanted to bring something to the forefront of the roleplaying world that maybe not as many people are familiar with as I want them to be. But I wanna play the way that I played when I was falling in love with roleplaying games when I was a kid. I wanna be able to sit around on a couch and some chairs with my friends, not have to worry about a map on a table in front of us, and just work together to use our imaginations to tell a story. But there's a system that I really love that's elegant, it's easy to learn, it's easy to teach, it's very easy to understand, and it really just gets out of the way when you want to tell a story together. And that is the Adventure Game Engine that Green Ronin Publishing used to drive the Dragon Age tabletop roleplaying game. I asked the developer three years ago to please make generic, so that we can build a setting and put on top of it. They said actually this is something we really wanna do. And it's come together. We have been able to work together with Green Ronin to develop the fantasy Adventure Game Engine. This is gonna take a lot of the things you know from the Dragon Age RPG, and put it all together to support our world, which I have had the best time creating. I sat down three months ago with some amazing writers, and just started brainstorming about what kind of world we wanted to explore. But what I kept coming back to is, I love science fiction, and I love fantasy. Why not put them together? Why not build a world that is inspired by the 1978 Heavy Metal movie, and 1980's amazing Saturday morning cartoon show, Thundarr the Barbarian. I thought it would be great for characters to encounter goblinoid kind of creatures, and instead of them using crossbows, they're using laser rifles. I've got it all worked out, we have a huge team of writers that put all this together that built an amazing codex that gave terrific logic to all of these decisions that we made. We're not gonna tell you what they are. You may discover some of them during the course of the season. So what is the name of this incredible world? The title of our show is Titansgrave: The Ashes of Valkana. You can sort of come up with your own ideas about what those words mean. I know, but I'm not telling. 'Cause that's not how the Wheaton talks. Titansgrave: The Ashes of Valkana will premiere right here at Geekandsundry.com on June 2nd. For those of you not in America, Titansgrave: The Ashes of Valkana will premiere right here on Geek & Sundry on two June. So I hope that you're as excited about this as I am, and I hope that you will tune in, and then watch us for ten straight weeks of incredible high adventure story telling, and until then, play more games.

IVAN: Hey guys, Ivan here, the host of Game the Game, on Geek & Sundry's new Twitch channel. I'm here with Becca, Ify, and Hector, to get you excited about International Tabletop Day. So International Tabletop Day is going to be on April 11th, and all of our friends at AEG have brought us an amazing edition of Love Letter in order to play with you today. That's right nerds. It's Batman Love Letter. Now Batman Love Letter is a game of logic, deduction, and risk, in which you try to capture or hold the highest value card in your hand by the end of the rounds. In the meantime we'll all be playing cards in order to eliminate each other. But whoever has the highest-value card at the end of the round will win a token. So who will be the greatest detective in all of Gotham? It's gonna be Batman.

BECCA: Oh, no, no, no, no, no, it'll be Poison Ivy.

IFY: You guys both are wrong, it's going to be Bane.

HECTOR: It's probably not gonna be Robin.

(all laugh)

IVAN: Now, normally we will play until seven tokens, but for the purposes of this video, we'll play until three. Whoever gets three is gonna win. Let's play. Pass out your cards Becca, one to each.

BECCA: Burn the first?

IVAN: Burn the first. You have to burn a card before you even begin, because there is a mystery card that isn't in play normally. So keep that in mind when you're playing.

HECTOR: Burning a card, who are we playing with? The Batman villain Firefly?

(all laugh)

IFY: Leave the jokes to me, Robin.

HECTOR: All right, fine.

IFY: Just so you know, I'm doing a set at the comedy store, and I need three friends to show up.

HECTOR: What night is it? I'm busy that night.

IFY: I didn't even give you the time yet.

IVAN: Hector, why don't you go first?

HECTOR: Robin.

IVAN: Robin, the man wonder.

HECTOR: Okay, here we go. I'm gonna play Robin. I've got protection for my entire next round.

IVAN: Right. So every single time you play a card, normally it has an action that is attached to it. So I'm playing Catwoman, who allows me to look at another player's hand. Poison Ivy? Noted. Now it's your turn.

BECCA: It's my turn, so I draw a card. I'm gonna hang on to that one, maybe. And I also play Catwoman. And I'm going to look at Bane's hand. That's terrible.

IFY: You make fun of me but you lack the understanding of my strategy. I will play the Batman. I can't guess Robin's because he has immunity, but I can guess Poison Ivy's.

IVAN: If he can guess correctly, not only does he get a token, but she's eliminated from the round, and now there's only three of us available. So it's one step closer to victory. What's your guess?

IFY: My guess is Two-Face.

BECCA: Incorrect.

IVAN: Robin?

HECTOR: Thanks, Batman. All right, here we go. I'm also gonna play Batman. I'm gonna guess that Poison Ivy has the Joker card.

BECCA: Incorrect.

HECTOR: Darn it. Jiminey Jillickers.

BECCA: Now you have to do something terribly embarrassing, right? Or is that just Half Scrolls?

HECTOR: Like maybe wear a Robin costume, cool, sounds good. Oh, already doing it, great. So great.

IVAN: I have two cards and I'm going to also play the Batman. You've been picked on a lot, Poison Ivy.

BECCA: I've been picked on so much.

IVAN: You played a Batman.

HECTOR: Get him Batman.

IVAN: I'm gonna guess you've got a Poison Ivy.

IFY: You're wrong!

IVAN: (groans)

IFY: No survivors!

IVAN: (laughs) All right, I'm done, go ahead, Poison Ivy.

BECCA: If anyone's wondering why so many Batman cards are being drawn, it's because there are five in the deck. There's either one or two of all the other characters. So I draw, and I will play, myself, Poison Ivy. This card says, choose any player including yourself to discard his or her hand, and draw a new card. Ivan, you look pretty confident. Discard.

IVAN: Discard, all right.

BECCA: And draw a new hand.

IVAN: Had a Two-Face.

IFY: It's time for me to draw.

IVAN: I have a hard time thinking that we're gonna get anything out of you in that mask.

IFY: Oh, you'll see.

BECCA: I'm sorry, what?

IFY: You'll see.

BECCA: What did he say?

IVAN: I think it's something about seals?

BECCA: Did you need help opening a seal?

IFY: I'll play the Batman, and I will guess Becca again, she has the Harley Quinn.

BECCA: Incorrect.

HECTOR: Geez, we're terrible at this game.

IVAN: We're really, really bad.

BECCA: I'm great at it.

IFY: Sooner or later.

IVAN: He's in there, or he's there. Not there, there. Not there, there.

BECCA: There?

IVAN: There.

BECCA: Where?

HECTOR: I'm going to play my own version of Bane. That was terrible.

BECCA: You don't have the mask.

HECTOR: Myself and another player can secretly compare hands, and whichever hand is lowest is out. So I'm gunning for you, Poison Ivy. Because you kissed me that one time, and then you didn't wanna hang out with me afterwards, like that was really mean, so.

BECCA: I had ulterior motives.

IVAN: I'm not looking, Batman's not looking.

BECCA: I'm out of the game.

HECTOR: You're out, yes!

BECCA: I had myself again.

IVAN: Which means you have a higher numbered card.

HECTOR: Yes, that is correct.

IVAN: Higher than five.

HECTOR: Good detective work, Batman. Real genius, this one.

IVAN: All right. This is the last card of the deck, which means after this, whoever has the highest card, wins.

HECTOR: Duh, Batman, we know, God.

IVAN: I'm playing Robin, Robin. All right?

BECCA: That makes me think he has the Joker.

IVAN: Well, we'll find out won't we? What do you got?

IFY: I had myself.

HECTOR: Boom, Harley Quinn beats Bane.

IVAN: And the Joker beats Harley Quinn.

HECTOR: Darn it.

IVAN: I got you, Joker.

BECCA: Take your token.

IVAN: I will take my narcissistic token that has my symbol on it.

HECTOR: This is just what Batman needed, an ego boost. Batman needed an ego boost, great.

IFY: Robin.

BECCA: The deb chef, the deb chef.

HECTOR: You seem to live with a multi billionaire, yet can't afford contacts. What's the deal with that?

BECCA: No burn card, no burn card.

IVAN: Oh, great. So since I won the last round, I get to play first, because I am the greatest detective. And I got a Catwoman, which means I think I'm interested in Bane's hand. Whatcha got, Bane? You got crap, is what he's got.

BECCA: Choose any player including yourself to discard his or her hand and draw a new card. Hector, burn your card.

HECTOR: You got it, but it's Robin, and I'm not gonna tell you again. All right, I had Batman, which is cool, because he's the least value card in the game, so that's just gonna help me out, so I'm just gonna grab a new card.

IFY: All right, I'm going to draw. Draw a card. Oof, oof, oof, such a good card.

IVAN: Who are you gonna use it on, Bane?

BECCA: It's probably Batman.

IFY: I'm gonna do a Batman card. Robin, do you have Poison Ivy?

HECTOR: (laughs) No.

IFY: My turn is over.

HECTOR: All right, it's my turn. Dick Grayson and Jason Todd, Tim Drake, Stephanie Brown, Carrie Kelley, John Blake, help me. Okay, here we go. My girl Selina Kyle, Catwoman, bam. And I wanna look at Bane's hand. Show me back here buddy, show me back here, whatcha got?

IFY: Got this.

HECTOR: Okay, good to know.

IVAN: All right. I'm going to just play my ward Robin.

HECTOR: You're welcome.

IVAN: Grant me immunity.

BECCA: Batman. I'm gonna guess that Bane has Poison Ivy.

IFY: You're wrong!

BECCA: You'll never have Poison Ivy.

IFY: I'll use Catwoman.

BECCA: To look at another player's hands.

HECTOR: Pause for error.

IFY: I will look at Poison Ivy's hand.

HECTOR: Don't do it Bane, don't fall into that venus fly trap. Get it, 'cause it's a trap, 'cause it's. It's a plant based pun.

IVAN: Good job.

IFY: Ah.

IVAN: There it is.

IFY: Ah. Ah!

IVAN: Robin, Robin go ahead.

HECTOR: Okay, here we go.

IVAN: What's it gonna be?

HECTOR: I'm gonna play Batman. And I'm gonna guess that Bane Has a Batman card.

IFY: You are wrong.

IVAN: For once he doesn't have a Batman card.

IFY: I want to point out to the watchers. Hector looked at my hand.

HECTOR: Oh I did, that's true.

IFY: And saw me play the card. He knew exactly which card was in my hand. And chose the wrong card.

IVAN: This is why you're the boy wonder, and not Batman.

HECTOR: I'd like to point out, that my chest has made me very uncomfortable, and I'm clearly out of my element, and dressing me up as Robin was a good call everybody, good call everyone. Good call guys. Wow.

IFY: I really thought that was game over for me. I was wrong.

HECTOR: Oh my God. Your annoying voice has really gotten into my head.

BECCA: That's his greatest power.

IVAN: I also have the Batman. So we know he doesn't have a Batman, you know what it is. Thanks Robin. Useless. So I'm gonna guess that Bane has Harley Quinn.

IFY: You are wrong!

IVAN: Damn. I tried. All the clues are there, just one missing element.

BECCA: I played Batman, I'm going to guess that Bane has Two-Face.

IFY: You are wrong as well.

IVAN: He has the Joker then, or something. How can you throw that many Batmans at a single man, and not get what he's got in his hand.

HECTOR: He really did break you, he really did. And now I'm Nightwing, great, that's how long that took.

IFY: I'm going to say. Two-Face can trade hands with Becca.

BECCA: (sighs)

IVAN: That's where it was. Robin?

HECTOR: It's my turn.

IVAN: Diddly fingers.

HECTOR: You guys think you're gonna win this? You don't know Dick. Greyson, because that's my real name. I'm gonna play Bane.

BECCA: Bane-in it up.

IVAN: What's up, who's gonna compare?

HECTOR: It's gonna be you, Batman. Let's see what you got, old chum. Oh hoh, bye, you're out.

(laughs)

IVAN: Batman card, so. Batman's out.

BECCA: Batman's the worst.

HECTOR: Oh my gosh.

IVAN: How's it feel to knock a man down from his tower?

HECTOR: It feels great.

IVAN: Right, okay.

HECTOR: How's it feel for not giving me–

MARISHA: Great for my back.

ZAC: We're live.
Q & A Session

MATT: What's up everyone, we got this camera right here in the middle, right?

ASHLEY: Hello.

LIAM: Oh, hi.

MATT: Thank you guys for watching. Hope you enjoyed yourselves. These guys all being crazy players, and kicking ass, and occasionally getting knocked unconscious, and nearly eaten.

ZAC: Any mods want to put this in sub mode for us? Let's do sub mode.

MARISHA: So you have to sub. Bye everybody who's not a sub.

ASHLEY: Bye!

ZAC: They can still watch, they just can't ask questions.

ORION: Oh. Okay.

MARISHA: Well, your word is not important.

LIAM: Laura had to bugger out.

ASHLEY: Wait, is that a little icon of you?

MATT: Yeah.

ASHLEY: What?

ORION: Yeah, he's an emoji now.

ASHLEY: You're an emoji?

MATT: It's weird.

TALIESIN: He's made it.

ASHLEY: You've made it.

MATT: All right, so how are we doing the questions? Are we just picking as we go?

ZAC: You can moderate yourselves.

ASHLEY: Laura and Sam did leave.

MATT: Unfortunately.

ASHLEY: Laura had to go to a thing, and Sam had to go to a thing.

MATT: Sam's thing is kids. Sam has two kids. Liam has two kids, but he–

ASHLEY: Hey look at–

(all laugh)

MATT: I am so sorry, everyone.

LIAM: I mean he's pretty good at Dungeon Mastering, right?

ASHLEY: Yeah, he's pretty good.

ORION: Someone asked what alignment we are. First question, what alignment are our characters?

MARISHA: We're all good.

LIAM: Chaotic good.

ASHLEY: Chaotic good.

ORION: Tiberius is chaotic good.

TRAVIS: Chaotic neutral, bitches.

LIAM: What was your first roleplaying experience? I saw that go through.

TALIESIN: GURPS in high school.

ALL: GURPS.

MATT: The second edition of Dungeons & Dragons in high school.

TRAVIS: This.

ASHLEY: Was my first, yeah.

LIAM: This guy just started. I did AD&D in high school, and I DM'ed while playing, which is totally cheating. This is the first pure experience I've had.

ORION: This is my first campaign also. I was a Magic the Gathering fan.

MARISHA: I actually had Matt as my first DM, way before All this started. So I played a few other games, and then, now I'm back to the OG master.

LIAM: I saw, when and how did you all start playing together? The reason this started is because, I directed Matt as Leon Kennedy in Resident Evil 6, and every time he came in he would say, “hey, you know, I'm running a game, you can come in and just do a one off.” And I was like, “oh, I got babies, I can't do that, I can't do that, I can't do that.” And then finally once for my birthday I thought, I can do a one off, it'll be the only time we'll do it, just see how it goes. Scanlan and I did a podcast together, and every week we would do some new thing, and we're like fuck it, let's play D&D. We all did it and everybody got snake bit, and it's been the best thing that ever happened. To me at least.

ASHLEY: Yup.

ORION: Our character alignments do matter on how we play the characters, an earlier question.

MATT: Yeah, they do definitely matter. A couple quick answers here. The conversion from Pathfinder to Fifth Edition was decided because, as we're going on to this show, and we had so many players, combat tends to get bogged down, and a lot of floating modifiers in Pathfinder. For large groups like this it's difficult to keep it flowing and moving. I felt once I had taken a look at Fifth Edition, that the combat system was a little more simplified, and a little easier to make freeform and just roll with it. So that was a much better decision. Plus Dungeons & Dragons generally has a better name recognition than Pathfinder, so when you're putting a show out there, it's probably easier to do with very minimal transition, it took a little bit of customizing, like for Percy's gunslinger. We just had to customize it, we made it ourselves. We sat down.

TALIESIN: Took a day.

MATT: Took a day, and we worked out, some of the stuff we wanted to keep, some of the things that didn't break it, we wanted to make it interesting. It is a martial archetype for the fighter class. So it does give the bonus a fighter class does. Nothing is too overpowered about it, other than just having custom weapons, and some cool grit-based abilities that we kinda transferred over from Pathfinder. It's interesting. It's a good challenge to see how it works out.

TALIESIN: It is, it's working out. I'm digging it. I keep reading and finding things I'm not doing that could be more interesting, so.

MATT: Keeping your hand and firing into the mouth of a bulette is fun.

TALIESIN: That felt great.

LIAM: Travis, everybody's asking about your shirt.

TRAVIS: Oh. I think it's a website called redbubble.com? I just googled Grog, and there was that.

TALIESIN: Just google Grog.

TRAVIS: I needed it right away. Right, right.

LIAM: I'm also seeing, why did we switch from Pathfinder to Fifth Edition?

MATT: I answered that a second ago.

LIAM: Oh, you did?

MATT: Yeah, the idea being that the reason we switched was it was easier for large-scale combat, and the system was a little more simplified, and I felt for such a large party it'd be easier to do. Plus character creation for any guests we have in the future, so that was the main reason. I love Pathfinder, but at this size, it's good. Answering your earlier question too, I saw someone ask, a good party size. Legitimately, my preference is between four and six players. This works because they're amazing players, and because we keep it very freeform, and not getting bogged down in minutia too often. The four to six players I think is a good sweet spot.

MARISHA: I see, does Keyleth have limitations on what animals she can transform into? Yeah, for the most part I can only transform into beasts and I have to be under a certain challenge rating. So right now, at my level, I can only turn into beasts that are a challenge reading of three or lower.

MATT: A third of your druid level, right?

MARISHA: Yeah, a third of my druid level which is nine right now. But for the most part I can change into almost anything as long as it's under a challenge rating of three.

MATT: Pike, how do you feel about Scanlan? Do you return his affections?

ASHLEY: Oh, well. I'm on the fence about him. He's really pretty great, but I don't know. I'm not really sold yet.

MARISHA: You know Pike, I feel like we haven't actually girl talked about this.

ASHLEY: I know, we never girl talked about it.

MARISHA: We should.

ASHLEY: I know, we should talk. I just, I really like him, I think he's really funny. I really the fact that he's a musician, but.

MARISHA: That's hot.

ASHLEY: I don't know, I'm not really sold on him yet.

MARISHA: I'm just concerned if he could treat you well.

ASHLEY: Oh no, you know what?

MARISHA: He's got bad habits.

ASHLEY: He likes to frequent brothels and things like that, which, you know. I'd wanna give him his freedom and his space. I don't know if I'm into it.

TALIESIN: If I say it so you can understand it, what's the point?

LIAM: Someone's asking if we like presents. I think we'd all like fan art.

MATT: Fan art's awesome, we love it.

LIAM: Immortalize our shitheadedness, that'd be good.

MARISHA: Oh, it's true.

ASHLEY: Another couple people on there were asking about my ears. And I really like supporting small businesses. And there's a store on Etsy called Tiny Tangerines, and she makes these by hand. And makes like deer, and bears, she makes a ton of stuff.

MATT: That's really cute.

ASHLEY: Check her out.

LIAM: We still got that little one. Socrates asked what was a favorite moment before we started streaming the show? Our first game was pretty amazing.

MARISHA: Our first game was great, I've got some good memories from that one.

LIAM: Most of us, I was giggling uncontrollably, I couldn't believe we were doing it. And just watching my friends, who I work with all the time, just dropping into character, there was no like, oh, let's see, what will I do, what am I doing? I will move, I will roll. Like Bailey, Bailey dropped into character from the get-go, and was a ringer. But the moment I was thinking of was when Pike died. Pike died.

MATT: Like died died.

LIAM: Shortly before we switched from private to public. It was emotional. A couple people started crying, I teared up. We put two and a half years into this, and we're all very connected to it. I'm not gonna get into it, but I've had a hard couple of years personally, everything's fine, but this was like therapy for me. And to see one of my friends go down?

ASHLEY: It was sad.

LIAM: It was fucking emotional.

MARISHA: I don't think a few people were crying, I think everyone was crying.

ORION: I was crying.

ASHLEY: I was definitely crying. I was like, “no, I love doing this so much!” I don't wanna, I mean, when you spend that much time with people, over two and a half years, you get so attached, and attached to characters.

MARISHA: We know these characters almost as well as we know each other now.

MATT: Factoids, the tower you made for us in Minecraft is awesome. Seriously, well done, look at the pictures, it's great, we're gonna have to actually go through it.

MARISHA: Wait, we have a tower?

MATT: A guy built an entire tower for the group.

ASHLEY: No way!

MARISHA: They built a castle Greyskull?

MATT: Essentially, on the Geek & Sundry Minecraft server. No. Wait no I did see that! It was huge.

ZAC: It towers over the entire –

LIAM: Of what?

MATT: Of him! Someone made a sculpture of–. Did you make that or somebody else? You made that?

ZAC: Oh no.

MATT: Okay, somebody else made it for you.

LIAM: Do we have $50 in the budget to go on eBay and get a Castle of Greyskull set? Put it on the set somewhere? Let's do that.

MATT: There we go. I see a couple quick questions.

ORION: To answer your question, there is an origin of Tiberius, fully written. I won't say it all right now, but he comes from a political family, and there's a whole bunch of layers to him. He is a thought-out character. The buffoonery is half-planned.

MARISHA: I mean, we're all really deep, thought out characters.

ORION: Well, they asked if I actually thought out a story for him. He does have a thing for this character named Allura.

MATT: Yeah, Arcanist Allura, the one that actually sent them on this mission, he has kind of a thing for.

ORION: She's super awesome. Hot, I think she's hot.

MATT: She's pretty hot.

ASHLEY: Super hot.

MATT: The gunslinger class info, I actually posted on Twitter a few days ago, it's in my dropbox if you look through my Twitter. It's on there, otherwise, we'll probably put it up on the website, when all the website stuff is up there. I'm happy to release it now. It's pretty balanced, it's fun. Might have some tweaks down the road, depending on how things play out. You should go to my Twitter, you'll find it there.

TRAVIS: We're gonna have a website with all our characters.

LIAM: Yeah, we're working towards that.

MATT: Working on it, yeah. Like a lot of things right now, it's a work in progress.

LIAM: Someone asked what kind of food would everyone like?

ORION: Ooh, like Thai food.

LIAM: I like Indian.

MATT: Ooh, Indian is good.

ASHLEY: I really noticed–

ZAC: Let them know not to order food.

LIAM: Don't, that's a terrible idea.

ORION: We just had a bunch of chicken.

MARISHA: Oh you mean like right now? Yeah, don't do it right now.

ZAC: If you tell them what you want, all of a sudden I'll get a call, like, “your food is on the way!”

MARISHA: Yeah, no, not right now, maybe next week.

TRAVIS: Matt, you're going to Wizard World in Philly. But we will not be joining because we don't own a private fucking plane.

MARISHA: But I'll be there. Is anybody else gonna be there?

TRAVIS: Oh really?

MARISHA: We'll be there.

LIAM: Somebody asked something, like, what do we hope is the result of this show? I can't remember the wording. Obviously we're doing this because we love each other and we're having fun together, but I also hope, D&D has been, its entire history has been like, “oh, it's this weird thing that guys do with dice in a room.” Anyone can do this, I love video games, I work in video games, but D&D has changed my life. It is social, it is person to person, it is real, because it's people in a room doing shit together, and that's kind of lacking a little bit in our world, and I would say find some friends. I mean, I love that there are sort of online tools to play with people across the country, but if you can find three or four people in your town to do this, I'd say do it. Do it.

TRAVIS: Yeah, do it.

MARISHA: There's something really amazing about the fact that we're all essentially kind of building and communally developing a story together, and that's something that not a whole lot of things can grant you, and we don't really get in today's society much. We're all kinda creating this as a thing. And I think it's good that we're like, hey, this is socially acceptable. D&D's cool, everyone should play D&D.

MATT: Actually, the IT Crowd episode of D&D is one of the best on camera examples of a D&D game night thing.

ORION: That is an awesome episode.

MATT: Fucking hilarious, and a great, truncated version of this is kinda what the game is. So good on you.

ORION: Cut to them weeping.

TALIESIN: So many questions going so quickly.

MATT: I know.

ASHLEY: I want a Grog shirt that says “do it.”

TALIESIN: And the kitty shirts were an accident. This was not planned.

MARISHA: Oh yeah, our kitty shirts.

LIAM: Someone's saying what edition to start with? I would start with the most recent, because you know they're gonna keep updating it over the years.

MATT: Fifth is great, Fifth is a great entry point.

LIAM: It's really loose. I feel like all of us felt like, we were doing Pathfinder, and… Fucking loved it, otherwise we wouldn't be doing it, but it was really intricate, and we were doing it every six or seven weeks, when we were off-air, so. We felt like the rules were really complicated and we'd lose track of it. We loved doing it, obviously, but Fifth Edition is really fast and loose. I recommend that. And Travis just stuck his finger in my ear, he kinda does that. He hits me in the nads a lot.

MATT: This is a homebrew campaign. I wrote it all just kind of for the hell of it. Custom, don't really base it on anything existing. I feel like I'm playing more in that world, and I always hate the idea of, in the middle of DMing, having to go to a module, or having to look for a rule that wasn't my own. It feels more detached. There are modules that are great, and I've run great modules, but for me personally, with the pacing, and the flow of the game, I prefer to do homebrew.

LIAM: Connected to that, someone asked, if you had any tips, and I'd like to know the answer to this too, because I'm running a game for my eight-year-old son and his friends who are about to start, do you have any tips for new DM's?

MATT: Yes. Let's see. I could do a whole panel on that. Tips for new DMs. Preparation is important. You wanna outline cities, come up with ideas for NPCs, that you think would be essential to a story, or like people that really run elements of the town. Simple notes can be like, they're this race, this is their disposition, if you have a particular voice you wanna try for, make a note of this kind of voice. So whenever you come back to them you have a reminder. And spend a lot of time building that structure, you don't have to be too detailed. Always leave room to play in the world, because you never know what your players are gonna do. Be prepared to improv. I prefer loose preparation, and then just kinda rolling where the players take you.

LIAM: Although you wrote a monologue for Clarence, right? Because that was very intricate. We were all just ready–

ASHLEY: Yeah, there's no way you just thought that up.

MATT: There are certain elements, part of the notes I take is for certain NPCs I'll write down key information that they know, and depending on how you ask them, what you say to them, and what you try and extract from them, they might give you some of the information, they might not, if you coerce them, or intimidate them. Or if they're willing to give up the information, I have all that written down. So for that information today, you guys were asking him, and since you allied with Clarence, he was willing to discuss with you. So I had all that prewritten, but depending on how much you said, it was what you guys asked.

LIAM: Do you have random encounters ready, in case we're like, “ah, fuck it, I don't wanna go down to the dungeon, I wanna go back up and beat up some dwarves.” Do you have shit kind of ready?

MATT: Yep. I have a stack of different creature and encounters already prebuilt, based on what you guys may encounter. Tonight was an example of players being able to pick what happened. But also it's one of those things where it depended, I don't know where you guys are gonna go. I present a story, I present an idea of a general throughline, but how you guys go from point A to point B, that's entirely up to you. Sometimes that can be a very long, meandering line, sometimes it could be a direct ray, so.

TRAVIS: There was a question, how much do you improvise, and when is it appropriate to improvise?

MATT: A lot, and always.

MARISHA: Always, yeah.

TRAVIS: The answer is yes.

MATT: I've had whole games where I've prepared a session, and none of it happened, because people just put an entirely wrong direction. Not wrong, but a different direction. So the whole game was just me pulling everything out of my ass.

MARISHA: Like that time we walked through the back door of the Thieves' Guild, that was fun.

MATT: Yeah, there was that.

MARISHA: What's up, Thieves' Guild. 'Sup.

ORION: Donkey Kong, Pikachu.

TRAVIS: What?

ORION: Somebody asked me what my favorite Smash Brothers character is.

TRAVIS: Oh.

LIAM: Somebody asked how we pick the character class that we picked. When we first started this game, and I said, “hey, it's my birthday, I wanna play a game.” Laura really likes rogues as well, but I made sure that as fast as I fucking could.

TRAVIS: She was pissed.

LIAM: So she, yeah. She plays rogue, in like Dragon Age and everything. That shit's a favorite class of hers, so I know I got it out there. Also, the reason that we're twins is because Laura and I have the exact same birthday, May 28th.

ASHLEY: I didn't know that.

MARISHA: I didn't know that either.

LIAM: That's why we're twins.

MARISHA: That's cool.

ASHLEY: I knew– I came in late to the game, and there were only a couple options left. And I had never played, so. I picked gnome because I was like, oh, that's funny. And then cleric, I didn't really realize what a cleric was. And how detailed it can be if you've never played. And important to the game. So when I started I was like, well shit, this is a little tougher than I thought it would be. But it's been awesome, I love being a cleric.

LIAM: I'm so glad we pulled you in.

ASHLEY: Me too, man, me too. Oh, also, someone asked, who is Pike's deity. And it's Sarenrae, the goddess of healing and redemption, among other things.

MATT: Which is carried over actually from Pathfinder. Fifth Edition has its own suggested, there's never a definitive pantheon. But they have the deity pantheon. But we're carrying over Pathfinder deities that were prominently in the campaign up to this certain point, because why the hell not? We're not gonna make her change her deity, that would be weird.

MARISHA: Travis, how did you pick your character?

TRAVIS: What? Oh. I asked what the biggest playable character was, I think. One that liked to fight, drink, and fight.

LIAM: One of the greatest pleasures for me, and I'm obviously a huge nerdlinger, and this is just me reliving high school. When I was talking to Sam about starting all this, and saying hey, let's get together, it's what I wanna do for my birthday, we pulled Travis in, Travis is fucking tight, look at him. He's not the stereotypical D&D player, and he was as snake bitten as the rest of us. Play Dungeons & Dragons, please play Dungeons & Dragons.

TRAVIS: It was so good.

ASHLEY: It's the best.

LIAM: It'll make you so happy.

ORION: What about you? Keyleth?

MARISHA: I remember at the time I had a, we were playing another campaign, and I had like a rogue assassin, that you were in with me. And I had a kind of assassin character who was super seductress, and really high charisma. And I remember when I joined this game, I didn't really know any of you guys really all that well, and I was kind of new to this world, so I ended up going with a kind of druid, and I kind of deliberately made her introvert, in a weird way to kind of reflect my newcoming to the group, but I was like, “whoa, it'll be like I can be quiet.” so Keyleth has a really low charisma, but I kind of spin it in that she's naive, and doesn't really know. And that's why she says things like, “but Clarence.”

(all laugh)

MARISHA: “You're just special.” Because she's naive, and kind of quiet. So she was just different than anything I've played before. But I really love being a druid. Druids are great.

TALIESIN: I played a lot in school. Other than Matt, I probably had the most experience playing D&D, and playing roleplaying games.

TRAVIS: Yeah you did. Genius.

TALIESIN: So I was really excited by the gunslinger in Pathfinder just 'cause it was something I hadn't done before. So I found it the most interesting and unusual, but I was not, and I also felt it was a hole within the group that could be filled very well.

LIAM: Thedouginator keeps asking you, Matt, how you brought the party together the first day of play.

MARISHA: Wait, we haven't heard Tiberius' story as sorcerer. Then we can answer that question.

ORION: When this was going on, I asked Matt if there was a caster yet, like any glass cannons, and he said no. So I debated between a wizard and sorcerer. When we went over the different mechanics, how a wizard and a sorcerer works, I was more drawn to that. And I'm a huge RPG guy.

LIAM: You're so entertaining.

ORION: To piggyback a quick question, to seal off the Tiberius thing, somebody asked if any of our voice acting influences our characters. Tiberius, absolutely. I played Elminster Aumar in the Neverwinter MMO. Which is a D&D MMO. And when we started this I'm essentially doing Elminster, but I made him super bubbly.

TALIESIN: No, someone asked how the group, yeah.

MATT: We got together, first session, essentially, was in a swamp town named Stillben, and the group at the time had, for their own separate reasons, been in this town, needing money, and had kind of come together as a mercenary group out of necessity. So the first session was them having known each other from a circumstance where they all ended up helping out an individual in the city, long story short, they had a small rapport, and knew at least each other were useful, and needed cash. And there was a job board in the town. So the first session was them being hired to look into a conspiracy within this swamp port town, Stillben. That was their first real adventure together. And when that finished, they kept going from there.

ORION: Uh, troll penis story.

ASHLEY: Troll penis.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: That's fair.

ORION: I know you guys keep asking.

LIAM: Take it away, Mercer.

MATT: There was a battle. Subterranean battle that involved the party sneaking upon a group of two trolls that were around a fire. The idea to work past this came to Tiberius to transform himself visually into a female troll so he could Bugs Bunny them. Hey boys, you know, that thing. Not knowing the temperament of trolls, especially ones that are deep underground, and don't get to see female trolls very often, they immediately just got extremely aggressive, and he found himself almost between a rock and a hard place.

ORION: I was getting raped by trolls.

MATT: The party then descended upon these trolls, and in the middle of battle, at numerous times, I believe Percy once and Laura the other, both took specific shots at each troll's dick. Rolled a good shot with enough damage to blow them off. Now being a troll, they regenerate. But it was still a good effect, and when the battle was over, it was decided by the party to at least take one as a trophy and place it in the bag of holding.

TRAVIS: That was decided by me, thank you.

MATT: By Grog, and as such, it stayed for a while, until it was used as an implement of distraction in another encounter I believe.

TRAVIS: It worked.

MATT: Yeah, it worked. That was where troll dick came from.

ORION: It was spitroasting.

LIAM: Jake Bodro asked what's it like playing for three hours in front of 2,500 people? I think our games have gotten a little bit better, only because when we play privately, there were sometimes lulls, where we weren't sure what to do, we would go off to bathroom, we would take a break. But now there's a little bit of the element of theater to it. Just a sprinkle of it. And it kinda of gooses the energy up.

ORION: I'm doing the same thing for the record.

TRAVIS: I keep seeing this one. For the 11 year old Sadie, the son of Odin shall have that cookie!

MATT: Aw, that's sweet.

ASHLEY: There you go.

MATT: There is one bag of holding in the group, and Grog always has it.

TRAVIS: A troll dick and a bulette tongue.

MATT: There are many things that go into the bag.

TRAVIS: It hasn't gone in that bag.

TALIESIN: Is there still a cow in the bag?

TRAVIS: No, Dork the ox.

MATT: Dork the ox is probably not.

TRAVIS: That's when we first learned its limitations.

MATT: Why does Scanlan have so many awesome spells? Bards in Fifth Edition have one of the options they can choose. As they level up, can choose a couple of spells from any spellcasting class, which is great, and the boon that bards kinda needed to be more combat-effective. And you can choose the School of Lore or the School of Combat, I think, for the bard. He chose the School of Lore which allows you even more spells from other classes to boost your repertoire, so he became a fucking amazing bard.

LIAM: Also, Sam Riegel did a lot of a capella in college.

TRAVIS: He did, he really did.

LIAM: He helped write several seasons of The Voice, which was all about a capella, so Samis sort of a ringer for the bard class.

MATT: Yeah, kinda had to happen that way.

TRAVIS: Can Marisha do her dwarf impersonation?

MARISHA: Nope.

LIAM: Yordee yorda–

MARISHA: Yorda youree yourdee yourd.

ASHLEY: Someone asked if Grog could keep one of his women in the bag of holding. You can't put living things in the bag of holding.

TALIESIN: As we've learned.

MATT: You can.

MARISHA: With Dork.

MATT: They just die.

TRAVIS: There's no air, it's like a vacuum. A magical vacuum.

MATT: Dork the ox did not survive.

TRAVIS: One giant dead ox came out of the bag.

LIAM: Someone keeps asking if any of us have hirelings, or henchmen, and the simple answer to that is no.

MATT: That's not true.

LIAM: Just Trinket.

ORION: At our Keep.

TALIESIN: We do.

LIAM: Oh, that's right!

TRAVIS: Yeah, we battle-tested them.

ORION: We have a Keep back in–

LIAM: Right before we started.

TRAVIS: The game before we came here. After they saved the kingdom of Eman, the sovereign Uriel Tal'Dorei III, as part of his gift to the group for essentially saving his family and the city itself, had a Keep constructed for them, and took about six months or so, and the Keep was finished, and then the party's first session was them finding who they're going to hire to take care of the Keep for them.

LIAM: It was like one episode of the Sims.

MATT: Kind of. It was great too, 'cause Grog's whole idea of making them to see who would be the better hire was to break the pool cue and be like, “who survives?” Make them fight, it was pretty great.

TALIESIN: For Tone17, I played a modified Malkavian, and a Smetty if you can believe such a thing, which was badass.

MATT: There you go.

LIAM: We've been playing for two and a half years. Someone wanted to know how long.

TALIESIN: Oh my God, really?

TRAVIS: Did we tell them about your podcast with the recording of the very first one?

LIAM: If you want, Sam and I, it's kind of languishing, but we have a podcast together called AllWorkNoPlay.

TRAVIS: It's amazing.

LIAM: We're both parents, we have kids, so we have no time to do anything. Enough time to take a shit. The first or second episode, the first episode is about us playing the first game, and there's audio from the first game. Again, go to iTunes, or to AllWorkNoPlay on Pod Bean, and you'll hear about two minutes of us dealing with a puzzle that Matt threw at us.

MARISHA: It was timed.

LIAM: Yeah, it was timed, there was an hourglass going off. It was us discovering D&D really for the first time. AllWorkNoPlay, all one word.

MARISHA: Actually one of my favorite stories that I tell all the time is about you, from our first game, 'cause if you remember, I didn't play. I just kinda helped Matt help you guys. I was like a D&D minion. And I remember I was helping you, and I remember you were like, “So, if I just wanted to go up and punch those guards, I could do that?” And I was like, yeah, well you would go up, and you would punch them, and then Matt would tell you how you'd do that. And then you went like this, you were like.

TRAVIS: Computing.

MARISHA: Yeah, you were like, “so, we can do anything?”

(all laugh)

MARISHA: And I was like, yeah.

LIAM: Taliesin on game one was actually not Percy, he was a dragonborn paladin?

TALIESIN: I was a dragonborn paladin.

LIAM: You fucking blew our minds, we were like, “what do I do? "Can I do damage points to stop this puzzle.” There was this tunnel with all these moving parts, we thought we were gonna be crushed, and he was a dragonborn for the first episode. It's in the recording on the AllWorkNoPlay podcast. And he just breathed ice on this water-based–

TALIESIN: Contraption.

LIAM: And froze it, and everyone was like, “you can do that? You can't just roll dice and hit it?” And that's when we kind of understood oh, it's whatever the fuck you want.

TALIESIN: That was such a good game for learning the basic mechanics. Such a well put together game.

ORION: Matt does control the music while we play.

MATT: Yes, I have playlists. They were much more broad playlists before, unfortunately on the stream, we have to use only approved royalty-free music, so it took me a while to figure it out previous to this.

TRAVIS: I do miss those Madonna songs.

MATT: I know. I used to play a lot of Bush.

MARISHA: Hey, would that count as fan art? If fans made us music?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MARISHA: Could we then use that? Yeah? He's nodding.

ZAC: They can send us whatever they want.

MARISHA: Some consent forms? Yeah.

TRAVIS: If one of your characters died, would you roll a new character?

ORION: Music people out there.

MARISHA: Any music people. Anything atmospheric.

LIAM: No, no, that's an important question.

TRAVIS: Ignore it.

LIAM: No, it's important. Someone's asking, if we die, would we roll in a new character? And plus, we just started this show, so part of us were wondering like, what if we die the second episode? What happens? We recorded this opening to the show that's coming.

MATT: So here's how I run the world. I feel that one of the problems in some RPGs is that death becomes flippant when magic allows you to completely undo it. In my campaigns certain powerful spells like Greater Restoration, Resurrection, things like that are a challenge, meaning you can definitely undo death, but a lot of it is based on your capabilities as a spellcaster, your attachment to the people you've been traveling with. So if ever a character does die, a resurrection can be attempted, but it is a challenge. Which means there's a possibility of it failing. In which case, if the resurrection fails, the soul is lost, the character is permanently dead. The player then can leave and never come back if they want to, but they have the option to create a new character, and be reintroduced to the campaign like half a level lower than the rest.

ASHLEY: That would suck so much.

LIAM: When Pike died we had, all of us, many series of dice rolls to do, and it was very story-based.

MARISHA: Yeah people are asking how she came back.

LIAM: Yeah, I mean, luckily we were in a big city, there was a huge temple. There were very wise clerics who were good at bringing people back. But still, we all had to roll. There was three rounds we had to roll, he might have fudged numbers, I don't know. But we were all still scared. We had to all, the majority of us, had to have good rolls three times in a row. Scanlan had to put–

TRAVIS: The tears of three women in the room.

LIAM: The tears, Scanlan had to kiss her on the head, he put a figure that he carved of her, it was very elaborate. This one was majorly in tears. Laura was in tears.

ASHLEY: I was in tears.

TALIESIN: Laura was hyperventilating.

ORION: And when that was going on, I remember, when that went off, being still Tiberius, I was like in half character but half not, and I was not crying, I was like, (grumbles) the whole time, and as soon as she sprung back to life, because the cleric–

MATT: Breathed in her first breath after that.

ORION: We luckily, because I know it was a tight roll.

MATT: It was a very tight roll. It was a DC of 14 in the final roll, and because Scanlan brought out this figure of her that he had carved for her like two months beforehand as a gift, sets it down and kisses her on the forehead, and it was kinda the final connection point. He needed 14, he rolled a 12, but, because he– There's a plus two modifier to the skill check, being a bard, and that was what he needed, he just made it. Basic, basic–

LIAM: Someone's asking if we drink while playing, and the answer is no.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: It's just water in those tankards.

TALIESIN: Coffee.

MARISHA: I almost did, yeah.

ORION: When she came back to life is when Tiberius, I was like, “oh my God, she's okay!”

ASHLEY: I think also having– Because with magic and everything like that, just bringing somebody back to life so easily, since we don't have that as much as maybe other games– It's heightened, so every time someone gets hurt, we're all, I think now, after having that death, all of us are like, “where are you at? Where are you at?”

ORION: Where are you going? I wish I could turn to Sam, but he's not here.

ASHLEY: We're all so stressed out now, which is, it's kinda cool.

MATT: Mortality's a real thing you have to deal with, and up until Pike's death it was kind of a thing people weren't considering. It just happened so suddenly.

LIAM: One I see keep coming up since we started is how would we react to life if we were our characters? I don't know, or differently from our characters? 'Cause I wouldn't stab my children when they frustrate me.

MATT: I'd be in a padded room.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: I feel like everyone tries to make decisions in a game that their character would make in real life, 'cause that's kind of the point. I take into consideration that I have shitty charisma, whenever I open my mouth. I feel like we all try and take into consideration our background and our alignment, because that's, you know.

TALIESIN: I feel significantly more badass than my character.

ORION: I feel… Tiberius is just me with magic. So that's how I feel.

TRAVIS: Grog was easy, he makes bad decisions, which is just all that I do.

MATT: Pike died when they were fighting what was called a treachery demon, or a glabrezu, which had basically infiltrated the Sovereign Uriel, and the city of Emon. And when it revealed its final form, it got one lucky critical hit on Pike when she was too close, and just instantly took her out. That's how she died. Someone's asking if they can (laughs) send us equipment we need for the show. Zac.

ZAC: Yeah, they can.

MATT: What do you need?

ZAC: We'll put it on the wishlist.

MATT: There you go, it's on the wishlist.

ORION: There's a wishlist?

MATT: I didn't know there was one, but now there is.

ZAC: Castle Greyskull on there.

LIAM: How do we feel about Team Demihooman, and inspiring them to play D&D for the first time? I think the number one reason we all wanna do this is because we love each other, and we love this game. The second thing is we all knew, we kind of felt like– We're gonna make Dungeons & Dragons cool again.

MATT: Try at least.

LIAM: And make it open for anyone to do, there's no reason not to do this. If there's someone you know who doesn't understand it, don't worry about it. Just find some friends and connect with them.

MATT: I find one of the difficult things is explaining to somebody who has never played an RPG, or a game of D&D at all, they're like, “how does it work, what is it?” And it's hard to explain, so if anything, now we have an example with this show. Other than the IT Crowd episode, or the Community episode, which are both great examples for quick little succinct things.

TALIESIN: If we had the power to bring one guest player for one session.

ORION: Oh, that's easy. Tom Hanks, for sure.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Mazes and Madness.

ZAC: Everyone is asking for you guys to somehow get Vin Diesel.

MARISHA: I was gonna say, Vin Diesel.

ORION: He lives for this shit!

MATT: Vin Diesel's good. Top of my list is Stephen Colbert, because I know he also plays.

ASHLEY: That would be amazing.

TALIESIN: I would love to see Joss Whedon do this. I admit I would like to see Joss Whedon play D&D. That'd be interesting.

ZAC: That might be possible.

TALIESIN: Okay, I'm throwing that one out there.

ORION: What, Tom Hanks isn't?

MARISHA: Felicia's got some.

MATT: But he's also a super fuckin' busy man.

ORION: Guys, tweet at Tom Hanks to come play with us.

TRAVIS: I'm Morgan Freeman, and I rolled a one.

MATT: Right now, Critical Role Hanks. See if we can make it trend. Patton Oswalt would be great.

ORION: That'd be hilarious.

ZAC: What about Dan Harmon, just so I can get fired, can we do that?

(all laugh)

MATT: Yeah. Hardwick used to play D&D with Patton Oswalt in the mid-2000s. I can't even imagine what those games were like.

ORION: I'd like to like– Amy Poehler, I'd like to have one of those.

ZAC: She might be open to that. She's a partner with Legendary.

ORION: I'd love her, Tina, Tina Fey.

LIAM: Someone keeps asking about Troy, I don't know if Troy Baker is ready.

ORION: I don't think he's ready for this jelly. You guys think he's ready for this jelly? I don't think so.

MATT: Whenever it comes up in conversation, Troy always gives me that look of like… “All right.”

TRAVIS: You can see him swimming in the infinity of–

MARISHA: “That's not cool.”

LIAM: He has some preconceived notions.

MARISHA: “My scarves are cooler than you.”

MATT: Once we get him like a proper plus two enchanted scarf.

ASHLEY: Can we ship Grog and Vex?

TRAVIS: Grog and Vex. No, I'm here to annoy Vex by smacking her bear around, and she's here to tell me not to kill myself. “Don't jump into the crevasse, it's 1000 feet deep.”

ASHLEY: Troy Baker is Pike's distanced dad.

(all laugh)

MATT: That's pretty funny.

LIAM: Answer this question I like, I saw it a couple times, how did you guys get involved in streaming for Geek & Sundry?

TRAVIS: Virgin sacrifice.

MATT: The best way I know that happened was, we had been playing for a while, and we all work in the industry. People began to hear about our voiceover D&D game, weirdly. Like I'd come into sessions with directors I've never worked with before, they'd be like, “Oh yeah, you're the guy that runs that D&D game.” How did that happen? How is that my thing? I'm cool with it, like heck yeah, my little high school self is like, I'm okay with being known about that. But then over time eventually Geek & Sundry contacted us. Felicia had heard about it. They called me in for a meeting, and we spent a number of months trying to figure out what format we were gonna try, if we wanna do it like multi camera, filmed canned episodes, then eventually the Twitch possibility came up, and we were like no, this is a much better format for us. And that's kind of how it happened.

LIAM: Are you kosher with me, you took this film, there's a video of you breaking the news to us that Geek & Sundry came to you about it. Are you kosher with me sharing that video?

MATT: Yeah, I don't see why not.

LIAM: All right, I'll find a way to put it through my Twitter. So just keep your eye on my Twitter.

ASHLEY: Wait, what are you sharing?

LIAM: There was a video that Orion took when Matt told us about Geek & Sundry coming to him. And us all sort of toasting and laughing.

ORION: Reacting.

LIAM: Giggling like idiots.

MATT: Why is D&D Pathfinder making you so much more attached to the characters than a regular RPG? If you mean like a video game RPG? I mean you get attached either way, but with this, because you are so much more fluid, with how you can influence the world, and the character, and the way the character reacts to the world and how it can influence it is so much more–

MARISHA: Personal.

MATT: Personal, a good way of putting it. It's just that much more involving, and you invest so much into that atmosphere. And it depends on the group, some people just like to do dungeon crawls, and kill and get loot and experience, and that's totally cool too. For me at least. I like 'em both for different reasons. I still play the crap out of video game RPGs.

LIAM: Someone asked if given the chance, would we like to do a live game at a convention like Acquisition Inc.? I'd like to do, although there's nine of us, so that'd be kind of–

ASHLEY: That'd be a long game.

ZAC: We may be asking you guys to do that soon.

LIAM: Oh good, then yes.

MATT: As long as you're handling the tech, I think we'd be fine with that.

LIAM: I'd like to do it.

ZAC: We may be streaming from Comic Con, I don't know. We may be asking if you guys are gonna go through that hell hole.

LIAM: The answer is yes.

ORION: Can we get a jib? I like crane shots.

MARISHA: Ooh.

ASHLEY: A helicopter? A helicopter shot.

ORION: Put it on the wishlist.

ZAC: Put it on the wishlist, a jib.

LIAM: How many of you aside from Matt have run a game of D&D or another RPG? In high school I ran a D&D game, I ran a Rifts game for a little while.

MATT: Rifts, yes.

LIAM: I ran a cyberpunk game for a little while.

TRAVIS: Really?

LIAM: Yes. The last two months I have been helping my eight-year-old son and two of his friends from school create characters. And I wouldn't have done this if Matt had not forced this shit into my life. I wouldn't have done this, but I'm about to start running a game for my son, the half-elf druid, and his two friends, the dragonborn fighter, and the dragonborn rogue.

TRAVIS: What if they die?

LIAM: That's just how the cookie crumbles, motherfucker.

TRAVIS: Oh man, you are teaching life lessons.

MARISHA: Gotta teach lessons.

TRAVIS: Go Fish and then D&D.

TALIESIN: I ran a Rifts game as well in high school. Then I ran a game of Vampire the Masquerade, and I was in a bunch of them.

LIAM: Of course you did.

TALIESIN: Couple rounds of Paranoia, and Hole, because that's funny. Hole was amazing.

MATT: Which you gave me books for. For my birthday, which was awesome.

MARISHA: I was a part of a Buffy the Vampire Slayer tabletop RPG for a while. Yeah, it's actually quite fun. I was a pyromancer.

ORION: Somebody asked a fun one, they asked if we play, what's our favorite video game?

MARISHA: What's our favorite video games? Oh that's a hard question.

ORION: Is it?

MARISHA: There's so many!

ORION: Well we can skip it.

LIAM: Metal Gear, Dragon Age.

ASHLEY: Probably Portal, Portal or Dragon Age.

MATT: Portal's great.

LIAM: Castlevania, Symphony of the Night, I played 'til I had blisters on my thumbs.

MATT: Symphony of the Night, yeah, dude. What is a man?

TALIESIN: Borderlands 2, and I'm happy–

ASHLEY: Borderlands 2.

LIAM: Pool of Radiance on my Commodore 64.

ORION: Oh shit.

LIAM: Baldur's Gate, which I played again on my iPad a year or two ago. Somebody, oh go ahead.

ORION: I was just saying.

LIAM: Somebody asked how we focus in the room with the sexual magnetism that is Scanlan Shorthalt.

ASHLEY: Ooh, it's tough man.

LIAM: I don't know.

TALIESIN: I wear a codpiece. I wear a codpiece that keeps everything in check.

MATT: I'm heavily sedated most of the game, just for that reason. Otherwise the clothes would just come right off.

LIAM: I just let myself get a gigantic boner every week.

MATT: Does anyone play League? Generally.

MARISHA: Sometimes. We're playing Heroes of the Storm more now.

ORION: I'm a big Final Fantasy fan. I like all kinds of games. I definitely would say if I had to pick one RPG, cause I'm an RPG guy, I love Chrono Cross, that'd be my favorite game. I've played that more than I have Chrono Trigger, which is way too many times.

TRAVIS: Dragon Age race/class. Ash, anybody that plays?

MATT: Elf rogue.

TALIESIN: Human fighter.

TRAVIS: Always the mage.

LIAM: Travis, stupid question, Thor, Odinson, or Hulk, in a knock down drag out?

TRAVIS: Oh (scoffs).

ORION: Type-0 also, dammit.

TRAVIS: Contractually, Thor, realistically, Hulk. I mean I am Thor, I can't say any other guy.

TALIESIN: Hulk's on a scaling power level, 'cause he just gets too mad.

TRAVIS: Yeah let's just be real about that. That's Hulk.

MATT: Tried new Final Fantasy yet?

ASHLEY: ChocolateSweets a bunch of times has asked would you guys consider cosplay for the games?

TALIESIN: Well technically. We already did.

MARISHA: You'll see, maybe next week?

MATT: He's trying the best he can. We have an intro coming up some point soon.

ZAC: Halfway done.

MATT: Halfway done, we all shot loosely in character costumes inspired by everyone's characters, so you'll be able to see that soon.

TALIESIN: If anyone would like to make us costumes.

LIAM: One man doing it all.

TRAVIS: A million arms.

ASHLEY: I think it would be kinda hard for me to play the game in cosplay, 'cause I have probably the most armor now.

MATT: You do. You wear the most armor.

ORION: That's a cool question. If you had to switch characters Matt, if you had to switch characters, which one would you be?

MARISHA: If you had to trade places with one of us?

ORION: Yeah, if you would switch characters.

ZAC: That question was Matt included, question was for everyone, if you guys could switch characters with anyone, who would you pick? Including Matt.

ASHLEY: I would probably switch with Liam or Travis.

TALIESIN: Tiberius would be mine, I'd take Tiberius.

LIAM: Scanlan, I would be Scanlan.

MATT: I would be Scanlan, bards man. Bards are my favorite class.

MARISHA: I'd be probably either Scanlan or Pike.

TRAVIS: I'd be Trinket.

MATT: Yeah you would.

TRAVIS: Why are you peeing on everything?

MARISHA: Bards and clerics are great.

ORION: I'd definitely be Grog. Just the complete opposite of what I can do.

TALIESIN: I'm a WoW player on occasion, I haven't played in ages.

ORION: For the Horde.

MATT: Player wants to play a lizardfolk monk, what's my opinion about the idea? That's fine, I mean a player can play whatever they want to, as long as you as the DM want it in your campaign. Just make sure they have more to their character besides “I'm a lizard monk!” have a good reason why they trained as a monk. If they make a cool personality behind it, work it into the social structure of their lizardfolk people, and see whether the monks will be shunned or accepted, are they an outcast of the society? Think of those ideas, and make a cool character based on the story, from a fighting standpoint? That'd be cool. I used to play a lizard monk in Ruins of Kunark back in the old EQ days. Oh man. That was a while back.

LIAM: Someone asked when Trinket came into the mix. Day one.

TRAVIS: Day one. She had that shit like that. She knew she wanted a pet bear.

MARISHA: He hasn't died yet.

ORION: He hasn't died, it's amazing, this thing has not died. He should have died so many times.

MATT: She spent all of her character focus in having a pet from combat, and then never puts it in combat, because she doesn't want it to get killed, and it's fucking hilarious.

TRAVIS: We put it jeopardy situations before.

MATT: Yeah, you have. Every time she goes, “never again!” And I'm like, all right, well.

TALIESIN: The day that bear dies, it's gonna get ugly.

ASHLEY: It's gonna be bad.

ORION: It's good to change her, as a character.

TRAVIS: Alignment shift.

TALIESIN: So much black to wear.

MARISHA: Douginator asked me a super detailed question. So I don't wanna blow over it, 'cause it was awesome. He asked me how my path has gone, and my personal Aramente journey, and how working with the group has helped and slowed it down. For the Air Ashari and for Keyleth's journey, it's kind of expected to take her maybe ten, maybe 20 years? It takes her like, the Aramente is expected to take a long time, and part of it is her kind of proving herself a hero. So she kind of ended up tagging along with this motley crew in order to kind of help her so she's not doing it alone. So it's a good thing that she's tagging along. But she also has to deal with sometimes the moral dilemma of maybe choices that she might not normally make if she wasn't with the group that she has to go with.

LIAM: I see two questions I wanna address. One is what is each of our favorite kill?

ORION: I was gonna say that was a good one.

LIAM: And the second one is what's the story behind the Super High Intensity Team?

(all laugh)

LIAM: Let's start with the kills, and then we'll get to the SHITs. My favorite kill, I finished off a blue dragon we faced. We all chipped away at this dragon, someone who had disguised himself as human for a long time, then we came to their secret cubbyhole, and they revealed themselves. We chipped away and chipped away, then at the end I sort of parkour-ran up a wall and shoved the daggers into its neck, and just slid down its entire body and finished it.

ORION: My favorite kill is actually–

LIAM: Until today.

ORION: When Pike kicked the bucket, and that moment all of us realized what happened, and there was an instant shift in real emotion, where whatever the hell, I don't even remember who we were fighting, because I went like, fucking cast this, and everyone's just, kill this thing, because we all cared so much in a real life situation, where we hated this thing, with real emotion, and we just slaughtered it.

TALIESIN: The demon-possessed royal family was my favorite.

LIAM: That was the same thing.

TALIESIN: Yeah, that was my favorite fight. Just using the light, also we were shooting, I was getting to shoot holes in the glass.

MATT: The entire throne room had a glass dome overtop, but because the family had been possessed by the shades, these shadow entities, it was all covered. They were able to force these spirits out of the physical bodies without killing them by being able to tear off the cloth or shoot holes in it to allow sunlight in and use that as part of the battle tactic, it worked out really cool.

MARISHA: Yeah, that was fun.

TRAVIS: My favorite kill wasn't even an enemy, it was when Scanlan summoned that pony, when we were facing those five wizards.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: He summoned this pony, and then I turned and abruptly cut its fucking head off, and reached in and grabbed its organs, and smeared its gore all over myself, and started screaming. And Mercer was like, “okay.”

ORION: The fight ended there.

MATT: Roll intimidation, with a bonus.

TRAVIS: Butchered a pony for intimidation.

MATT: Yeah, it worked.

MARISHA: I think one of my favorite Keyleth moments, it wasn't a kill, but when we were in the crazy, Michael Jackson, Neverland Ranch, sorcerer dude's plane of existence.

MATT: The Dread Emperor.

MARISHA: Yeah, when we were in his plane of existence, and we encountered that big tree rock monster, and I just happened to take Command Plants, and he happened to be a plant monster, so it just worked out perfectly, and I was just like, “We don't wanna fight you! Back down.” and avoided an entire battle.

TALIESIN: Getting the magic carpet was also pretty badass.

MARISHA: Oh yeah, that was a good story.

LIAM: Another fabulous moment that you guys have to know about is we wanted to get into a tower at one point, and there was a very intelligent sort of right-hand man to whoever owned the tower. Scanlan just started fast-talking, which is his defining characteristic. Took his finger and put it right here as a mustache, and said, “Hi, I'm Burt Reynolds.”

(all laugh)

LIAM: And he rolled, either Scanlan rolled a 20–

TRAVIS: I think it was a natural.

MATT: He rolled a natural 20.

LIAM: And you weren't expecting it to work, in any way, shape, or form, and you went, “Okay.”

TRAVIS: Mr. Reynolds.

MARISHA: Burt Reynolds just announced that he's gonna be at Philly Wizard World with us, so we could theoretically tell him that story.

MATT: I have to.

ASHLEY: Burt Reynolds would be a dream guest.

ORION: Him and Tom Hanks.

TRAVIS: He'd have to play on a bearskin carpet.

MATT: The whole family history organized.

ASHLEY: I've only had one kill.

TRAVIS: But, it was what?

ASHLEY: And it was a dragon.

TRAVIS: Yeah, dragonslayer.

ASHLEY: But the thing that I, probably the whole battle with the family that was sort of possessed when I actually died, that was probably one of my favorite battles. Maybe not after I died, prior to. When I got to finish off the dragon–

TALIESIN: Was that on Christmas?

ASHLEY: The dragon? Yes. That night was so amazing because we had, we made it a winter festival. So we all came in our pajamas. It was close to Christmas, that's why it was a winter festival. It was like our little Christmas party.

MARISHA: Our holiday episode.

LIAM: That was sad for me because it was my idea but I had health problems at the time and I had to bow out, and I was very, very, very sad.

MATT: But you made it to this year's.

LIAM: I made it the following year, yeah.

TALIESIN: Yeah, we had a whole little thing, it was really nice.

MATT: I would love to play D&D with Dame Judy Dench.

MARISHA: Heck yeah.

MATT: You guys can tweet at her so you can get her to agree.

LIAM: The SHITs. How did we become the SHITs?

MATT: Yes. So the party had run into a, debearded, actually, shaven dwarf named Grimthorn, who wanted to represent them for, what is occasionally, a roving brawling guild, essentially. Like underground fighting rings that happen around the world at different points throughout the year. It may come up again, we'll see. But they had to think of a team name. And Scanlan. Recommended the Super High Intensity Team. Which stuck for a while, so the group name, against the better judgement of, I think, a lot of the group, became The SHITs. So their name for a while was The SHITs, they were announced as The SHITs in the ring, when they won the tournament. That was when the pony was cut in half, to intimidate the opposing team.

TRAVIS: Scanlan's idea also.

ORION: Tiberius and Keyleth were not happy.

MATT: SHITs stuck for a while until eventually they got rid of the SHITs, as all of a sudden they were about to go to the winter festival parade in their honor for saving the entire city of Eman, and the Sovereign Uriel said, “What should we announce you as?” and it was decided not to announce you guys in front of the city at your parade as The SHITs.

ASHLEY: I was super into it. Still love The SHITs.

MATT: Instead the name became Vox Machina. So if you've heard them say that, that's the official team name they've created for themselves as a group.

ORION: With credit to Sam as well, which was voted down was also the Brotherhood of the Sisterhood. Which I was a huge fan of. I really wanted it to be the Brotherhood of the Sisterhood. But Vox Machina sounded cooler.

ASHLEY: The Brotherhood of the Sisterhood of the Order, or something like that?

MARISHA: The Order of the Brotherhood of the Sisterhood.

ORION: So Tiberius recognizes as the Vox Machina/Brotherhood of the Sisterhood.

LIAM: LargoSensei keeps asking, what are your most cathartic voice acting experiences? I'm gonna guess for Ashley that's The Last of Us, since that's your fucking heart ripped out of your chest.

ASHLEY: Probably, yeah.

LIAM: Gollum was pretty sad for me, because he's a miserable bastard. Also Angel from Wolverine, the X-Men.

ORION: Wait, does cathartic mean sad?

LIAM: Well it just means get your fucking demons out. Chew it up.

TALIESIN: Mine's really old, it's probably either Monster or Paranoia Agent. I'm gonna go that far back. Yeah, all the way back.

MATT: Fate Zero for me had a moment that was pretty intense emotionally, that I really enjoyed.

TRAVIS: Knuckles the Echidna in Sonic.

(all laugh)

MATT: Sonic Boom, yo.

MARISHA: Boom, Sonic Boom.

TRAVIS: What's that?

LIAM: Infamous, maybe?

TRAVIS: Oh, yeah.

LIAM: Pretty fucking sad.

TRAVIS: Brothers. Brotherhood. Brotherly love.

ORION: I'd say for me it was doing Type-0. Not so much the actual lines, 'cause I had a lot of fun. I don't know if that's cathartic, but. Completing an actual real life dream goal. I've said this a couple times before, but the last day I was recording the last stuff, I was literally crying on the way home, because I finally got to level myself up. And this thing kept it up, and it was really cool.

TRAVIS: Matt, who were you in Fate-0?

MATT: I'm Kiritsugu, Kiritsugu Emiya.

TRAVIS: Bless you.

MATT: Thank you. That's the dark assassin character.

TALIESIN: Saw a question about Percy's home, and his family. Percy has a really really big family, that I don't mention in the video, and he has not been home yet. He has no interest in going home yet, 'cause that's terrifying. So we have not dealt with that.

MATT: That's going to be interesting when that comes around.

TRAVIS: What's under the freakin' lake?

LIAM: What's under the freakin' lake, Matt?

MARISHA: Yeah, what's under the lake?

MATT: You were told.

ORION: Yeah, it's one of those big–

MATT: Aboleth.

MARISHA: Oh yeah that's right, I did write it down.

MATT: Which you encountered one underground.

MARISHA: Yes, I was a shark.

MATT: Put the slime into the water. You could only breathe water and couldn't breathe air.

MARISHA: Remember, 'cause I was like, “I'm gonna be crafty and turn into a shark,” and then I started immediately drowning.

ORION: How do you keep players from getting OP, Matt?

MATT: Make the monsters more powerful.

ORION: Behind the scenes, I'm always constantly up his ass, trying to make Tiberius as OP as possible, and he's always stopping me a lot.

MATT: Balance is important. I mean, the characters, everyone here has really good characters that have a lot of cool abilities, but they also have a lot of challenges that come at them that make them, not only use those abilities, but also, monsters can have cool abilities too.

LIAM: Bracheon89, you said Stephen King plays D&D?

ASHLEY: Yes, that's what I was trying to say. What?

LIAM: Bracheon, we're going to wait for your answer. How do you know he plays D&D?

ASHLEY: Are you sure?

LIAM: Let's get him in here.

MATT: I'd love that.

TALIESIN: The group's worst decision in D&D was the dragon, I think.

MARISHA: Oh yeah, Grog?

TALIESIN: Grog.

TRAVIS: Listen, there was a shitload of gold.

ASHLEY: I still don't think that was a bad idea.

ORION: Oh, when he started hoarding all the gold?

MARISHA: We still don't know if that–

LIAM: Takes a lot of stupid.

MARISHA: He might have been an ally. We might have killed someone who was valuable.

TALIESIN: You were still freaking out like a month later, you were feeling really bad.

TRAVIS: Well, I did almost get us killed.

ASHLEY: I feel like it was a good decision.

MATT: To be fair, it's the only time I've ever had a player rage loot before.

(all laugh)

MATT: You went into a rage, and used it to just loot more. And then the dragon revealed itself, and you looked at it, and you just kept looting.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: You guys take care of this.

ASHLEY: That was hilarious.

MATT: That's Grog.

LIAM: Somebody keeps asking, and we'll do a show of hands here, Lord of the Rings or Game of Thrones?

ASHLEY: Oh, come on.

MARISHA: Ooh, that's tough.

LIAM: What do you prefer? 10 seconds to think about it, and then I'll–

TALIESIN: That's like Star Trek or Star Wars.

MARISHA: Yeah, hard.

LIAM: They're asking the question.

ZAC: Don't be afraid, come on.

TRAVIS: That's tough.

LIAM: Lord of the Rings, fuckin' Lord of the Rings. There you go, there's the answer.

ASHLEY: I don't know, man.

TALIESIN: Lord of the Rings, but I see Game of Thrones on the side.

LIAM: I love Game of Thrones.

MARISHA: Of course we do.

TRAVIS: Lord of the Rings.

TALIESIN: We wouldn't have Game of Thrones without Lord of the Rings.

MARISHA: That's the thing.

LIAM: Maybe possibly not Dungeons & Dragons without Lord of the Rings.

ASHLEY: This is true, it's the OG. I don't know what that even–

TALIESIN: You said that. That just came out of your mouth.

ASHLEY: Please let's leave it alone. Moving on.

TRAVIS: That's the OG.

ASHLEY: What is this, what do we have over here? Well, who was the old gnome that Grog saved in his intro video?

LIAM: Pike's daddy.

ASHLEY: No, that was my great great grandfather.

TRAVIS: That's right.

ASHLEY: Yes, great great grandfather Wilhand.

TRAVIS: Wilhelm, hand? Wilhand.

ASHLEY: That's right.

LIAM: Wilhand the money.

TRAVIS: Grog has an intelligence of six, he's gonna get names wrong from time to time.

LIAM: Everybody, if you could choose whatever fantasy world to live in, what would it be?

TRAVIS: Marvel.

TALIESIN: Ooh.

ORION: I would live in the… Next Generation world, universe.

TALIESIN: You had me at Marvel.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

ZAC: Here's the thing, you could live in Marvel what you live in, if you couldn't live in that world as a superhero, just as a normal person.

TRAVIS: Right, not in New York. Anybody that lives in New York in the Marvel universe is just stupid. Like rent's gotta be $1.50.

TALIESIN: Terrible idea.

MATT: I'd say Myst. So I can just write my own worlds to infinity from there.

LIAM: Lord of the Rings.

MATT: Or Amber as well.

ASHLEY: I was gonna say Lord of the Rings. Maybe Rivendell.

MARISHA: I'm gonna say Final Fantasy 10.

MATT: Grey Havens. If you're gonna do Lord of the Rings, do Grey Havens, 'cause you're far enough away from Mordor, where it's generally not gonna be a problem.

LIAM: I wanna be one of the Fellowship. Ashley Johnson lived in a Marvel universe already, right?

MATT: That's true.

ORION: See, and it's a big hassle.

MARISHA: It was a big hassle.

ORION: Yeah.

MATT: Before the stream, our D&D session–

MARISHA: High insurance rates.

MATT: Before the stream our D&D sessions would happen once every month to month and a half, more like month and a half.

LIAM: Why is Matt Scarlet Witch?

MATT: I'm down with it. 'Cause I alter reality. Power makes sense. Our sessions used to be once every month, or month and a half, and they would be about six to eight hours. But the problem is we'd play so infrequently, every session I'd have to remind everyone what happened, and it was hard to schedule. Part of the reason we're even doing this show, is because it's technically work, which allows those of us who have families and children more of an excuse to come more often. So yeah.

LIAM: Googoo17, Arkazey keeps asking, what's your favorite nerdy t-shirt you own? Mine is one that says Mordor World Tour, it looks like a rock 'n' roll t-shirt, but it says Mordor World Tour.

MARISHA: That's cool. Favorite nerdy t-shirt.

TALIESIN: I've got a Sons of Anarchy Doctor Who t-shirt, I'm a really big fan of. I'll wear it next week.

MARISHA: I've got like an army, kind of soldiery, looking t-shirt that says Chimera, like Chimera Corps.

MATT: That's actually the one I was gonna say, that's my favorite shirt too.

MARISHA: I like your displacer kitty you've got.

MATT: Displacer kitty's kind of cool. Adorable.

TALIESIN: I like your shine on me shirt.

MATT: Oh God. If you guys haven't watched. Chris Dane Owens, on YouTube, Chris Dane Owens, Shine on Me. It's a music video, watch it. Chris Dane Owens, Shine, or Shine on Me, YouTube, do it.

TALIESIN: I love that you own the shirt from it.

MATT: I bought a shirt from it, 'cause it's that amazing, I had to.

TRAVIS: Did anyone tell Pike that Scanlan killed the naga for her?

MATT: I don't think someone's done it yet.

LIAM: Scanlan had his first kill. You saw it, right?

MATT: You saw it on the stream.

ASHLEY: I saw it, me, Ashley saw it, but Pike did not hear about it yet. Who knows, that could be the thing that seals the deal. I'll be like, you killed the naga? Okay, let's do this.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Any betrayals in the game?

MATT: No betrayals, disagreements, and occasional–

TRAVIS: Trippings and beat-downs.

MATT: And stealing of flying carpets.

ASHLEY: I actually did step, I kind of did hurt Liam one game. Or Vax.

LIAM: The game we played together? We did just the two of us one night.

ASHLEY: There were some of the girls changing in a room.

MATT: I forgot about this.

LIAM: I was very curious to see you naked. But that's kinda fallen on the wayside.

ASHLEY: Vax was very curious to see what a gnome looked like naked.

LIAM: Never seen it before.

MARISHA: So you did a little peeping tom?

LIAM: Why wouldn't I wanna expand my horizons?

MATT: So he rolled stealth.

ASHLEY: So he rolled stealth, and he did, and saw or whatever, and then when I came back out, and I found out about it.

LIAM: Looked good, it was compact.

ASHLEY: It was just a small human. And I think I stepped on your foot, and gave you some damage.

LIAM: Maybe a hit point.

ASHLEY: Yeah, a hit point or two.

MATT: You earned it.

ASHLEY: I earned it.

ORION: Somebody, seagullblaster–

LIAM: No, Vax didn't spy on Vex, sorry, go ahead.

ORION: Asked– Tiberius said something about the Palestone, and what it is, and this is, somebody asked a different question, this is kinda gonna answer both. I, and everybody else, wrote backstories for Matthew to essentially give him so he could construct our universe. Tiberius' particular quest is looking for particular artifacts. Essentially I made him like Mulder. Nobody believes in the city that these things exist, except him, so the truth is out there kinda thing. So I made up these five different artifacts that do different things. And I don't know what they do until I might maybe find them, and if I do, it's up to him, to Matt, to determine what they are, if they are anything. They might be nothing, I don't know. I've found one item so far, and it's awesome, and all of us have given him bits and pieces, and that's how he constructs our story with things that you throw in yourself.

MATT: Yeah, and each player, all their story lines work into the world. Not all of them will happen immediately of course, some people have had personal encounters and story encounters already, some are yet to occur, and there will be points throughout the campaign where the party will probably have to move and individually deal with each person's story to some extent.

MARISHA: Dealt a little bit with each person.

MATT: Touched a little bit like– In Eman, we've seen Vex and Vax's father.

LIAM: Vex and I ran into to our father again for the first time in many years, it was a little frosty.

MATT: Had a new family.

LIAM: Have a little half sister.

TRAVIS: Matt, you have a favorite voice? And does it hurt to do the gnarly monster voice?

MATT: If you do it for an extended period of time it can be kind of shitty.

ASHLEY: I don't know how you do this new one.

TRAVIS: Breathing in and out.

LIAM: That's inward singing, man.

TRAVIS: It is inward singing.

LIAM: And then I'm fucking singing, and then–

MATT: Actually, it's funny, a bunch of my NPCs that I've done since high school have ended up turning into characters I've booked. I'll go into an audition and be like, “I'll go ahead and do Nutibe Curios, from my Second campaign,” and I'll end up doing that character. Alof in Pillars is a character I NPCed back in high school.

LIAM: That's awesome.

TALIESIN: They still haven't heard my favorite voice from this campaign yet. 'Cause we haven't gone back to the city yet.

MATT: Oh, Gilmore?

LIAM: Gilmore is a wonderful magician who owns a shop.

ORION: Was that the fancy–

LIAM: Yes, in the city of Eman, he's got a big friggin' crush on me, and wants me. Wants me and some day you and I will actualize that.

MATT: We'll have to roleplay that.

LIAM: Maybe in a game. Maybe not.

TRAVIS: What do we think is taking over the hive mind?

MATT: What do you guys think is taking over the hive mind?

MARISHA: Well we know it's named–

ORION: Obviously some butthole.

ASHLEY: I think I might have an idea.

TRAVIS: Yeah, you had a vision that we don't even know about yet, right?

ASHLEY: Well.

TRAVIS: Taking those mushrooms, having those visions.

ASHLEY: Taking those mushrooms.

LIAM: Someone asked how do game devs find us for acting work? We all audition, hundreds of people audition, for every role in Los Angeles, we all just try. Today I worked on a superhero game, and the guy who was directing me for voiceover said, “Hey, so what are you doing for the rest of the day?” And I said, well, I'm gonna go to the gym, I'm gonna do this, then I'm gonna go do that, do you know about that D&D show that a couple of us are doing? And he's like, “Yeah, I heard about that.” And the guy who had written the game went, “Yeah, I've watched every episode.”

(all laugh)

MATT: So awesome.

TALIESIN: That's so cool.

ASHLEY: Someone wants to hear Gilmore's voice.

TALIESIN: I think we should save that for, wait until they actually meet Gilmore.

TRAVIS: Yeah, we can't give it away.

MATT: Gilmore's a fun one.

ASHLEY: Gilmore's awesome.

MATT: Gilmore is very Broadway. He's very–

TALIESIN: Not the gargoyle.

MATT: No, no. I could see him being a character in a John Waters film.

TALIESIN: Oh my God, yeah.

ASHLEY: Totally.

LIAM: Give him a pencil-thin mustache.

MATT: Yeah.

TALIESIN: I'm trying to catch up.

TRAVIS: Greater overall motivations?

MATT: That may or may not be secret, depending on the characters.

MARISHA: What is each person's favorite D&D monster?

TRAVIS: A dead one.

LIAM: I liked it when Grog got it on with a, what was it, a nymph?

TRAVIS: What?

MATT: Yeah!

TRAVIS: You don't know man, I went through the portal, handled my business like a champ.

LIAM: In the air.

TRAVIS: I don't kiss and tell. Nobody knows. I got what we were supposed to get.

LIAM: A nymph could have attacked us, but Grog looked her in the eye, and she liked what she saw. Then he disappeared for a little while, and he came back and he was in a really good mood.

TRAVIS: I flashed her the look, man. She was mine, what can I say?

TALIESIN: I like the little green gelatinous cubes. I think they're fun, and then if you make 'em right, you can just make 'em out of jello, and eat them when you're done, that's awesome.

MATT: I don't wanna answer that question necessarily, because I might be using them in the campaign at some point.

ORION: Which one?

MATT: Nothing.

ASHLEY: So that means we haven't used 'em yet.

MATT: But overall, I just love the tarrasque because it's like the game ender. It's the godzilla. It's the one DM's move where he's like, “I'm done with this campaign, hey guys, you're gonna fight a tarrasque, either you're all gonna die, or you beat it, and you beat the game!” So the tarrasque is always fun.

ORION: Is it the final boss?

LIAM: I've always been fascinated with the mind flayers. You're fucking throwing an army of them at us. 'Cause they're dangerous.

MATT: Yeah, they're terrible.

LIAM: And they're so outside of the norm.

MATT: And hey you stealthed up, and pretty much killed one in one round today.

ORION: That was insane. When the mud on the face, and the stab in the fucking back of the head.

MATT: You guys black ops'ed that entire barracks.

LIAM: I'm proud of the knife.

TALIESIN: I know what you're talking about.

TRAVIS: Grog and Scanlan have no bastard children, that we know of. Or that you can prove.

LIAM: Other streamed D&D games, like Rollplay hosted by itmejp?

TRAVIS: No.

LIAM: No. Maybe we will, though.

ORION: I won't.

LIAM: Everyone play Dungeons & Dragons.

ASHLEY: My favorite NPC character is a little butler who I think became–

TRAVIS: Yes!

ASHLEY: He's the cutest little thing you will ever see, and I think now he works at–

TALIESIN: He works for us now.

MATT: Yep, you guys hired him, and he's currently helping keep your Keep in good shape.

ASHLEY: What's his name?

ORION: The old fellow, right?

MATT: I'm trying to remember, I'll have to go look at the list again. I have so many NPCs, I have a hard time.

ASHLEY: He's just the sweetest little thing you ever did see.

MATT: Grog's flatlined intelligence, anything like that happen before? That was the first of that type of situation.

TRAVIS: I went unconscious once 'cause I fell, how far did I fall?

TALIESIN: Wow, you fell.

ORION: Oh, that was a crazy one too.

MATT: They were there fighting in an underground cavern, and at the very, very top of this giant, like 170-foot ceiling, which they had all kinda floated up to, and put a rope, anchor in.

TRAVIS: I was ready to Toro the bull.

MATT: The first umber hulk you guys ever encountered, ended up pushing Grog out of the hole, bullrushing him. Had the rope tied around his waist, but unfortunately Grog weighs about 600 pounds, rope snapped, and he took enough damage to go from full health to unconscious and bleeding out in one round.

MARISHA: 'Cause he confused you, right? And you just hari-karied off the hole?

TRAVIS: I was gonna dodge and be all awesome, and say ole or some shit, but I was just out.

MARISHA: That was when I was a spider tiger. 'Cause I cast Spider Climb on myself, and I was in tiger form, so I was spider climbing all over the place.

MATT: That's also one of my favorite risky rolls, which was after that happened, Tiberius, you pushed the umber hulk onto the ground, or through the hole, it fell.

ORION: I had this amazing spell with Pathfinder called Aquasphere, orb, and you can like, capture large creatures. I literally can waterbend a sphere and carry this dude and drop them down, it was amazing, I miss it so much. Continue the story.

MATT: So essentially Tiberius decided, 'cause Grog was unconscious, and the creature was down there. All of them were stuck 170 feet up, in this little hive essentially. Tiberius said fuck it, he jumped out of the hole, swan dove down, and cast Featherfall on himself at the last minute, had to make a concentration check because of the wind rushing past, and having to cast a spell while falling. It's a very difficult thing. He had about a 40% chance of success, 60% chance of instant death, and he made the roll. I love risky moments like that so much, I love 'em.

TRAVIS: It was pretty legit.

ORION: I did it again and held that fucker, it was intense.

MARISHA: I'm wondering when we're gonna face a beholder.

MATT: That'll be nasty.

MARISHA: That's my favorite D&D monster.

ORION: With all the eyes?

MARISHA: They're like a big floating head with a giant eye, and they've got tentacles, with eyes on the end of 'em, and each eyeball does a different ray of effect.

TRAVIS: A beholder?

MATT: Nasty.

TRAVIS: You know what that is too?

LIAM: Yeah.

MARISHA: They're nasty.

ASHLEY: Bad news bears.

MARISHA: They're super awesome. One of these days we're gonna fight one.

MATT: One of these days.

LIAM: They're a signature character of Dungeons & Dragons. They represent D&D.

TRAVIS: What made the dwarves get bigger today in the battle?

MATT: That's actually an ability of the duergar.

LIAM: Viagra.

MATT: Yeah. They can summon through sheer force of will, and just the way they've been bred over time, they can increase their form for a short time to increase their damage, and be just a general asshole, so. It's an ability the duergar have.

TRAVIS: Long lost son.

LIAM: I'm gonna guess that none of us have been to Sweden?

MATT: I have.

ASHLEY: My dad was from Sweden.

MATT: That's awesome. I've been to Gothenberg.

TALIESIN: That's not surprising.

ORION: I have not, but I would like to go.

MARISHA: Yeah, who wouldn't want to go to Sweden?

LIAM: Makes sense. Pale and blonde.

MATT: Have you been?

ASHLEY: Never been.

MATT: It's beautiful, I spent two weeks in Gothenberg, Sweden, on business years ago. It was gorgeous. Food was amazing. Nothing like walking down the street and seeing a giant gothic stone structure with an archway and a gargoyle perched, and you walk in and it's a 7-Eleven. It's pretty hilarious. All the architecture there is old, but it's been repurposed, it's great.

LIAM: If you had to choose would you pick to receive an extra level, or Matt's hair?

MATT: God damn it.

LIAM: Matt's hair.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Hair, obviously.

MARISHA: Receive an extra level or Matt's hair.

TRAVIS: You can't get hair like this without unicorn blood. My God.

MATT: I'm gonna shave my head one of these days.

LIAM: Shave his head, he can't DM anymore.

MATT: I'd wither. It's like Sampson. I would just like become this little raisin, I'd be David Tennant.

LIAM: The beholder strikes for the– mawp. Mawp.

MATT: Let's see. What are the questions we got up there?

MARISHA: It is 11:38, by the way.

LIAM: What is the most outrageous and unexpected thing to come from a natural 20? That was Scanlan.

ASHLEY: Probably the–

LIAM: Scanlan as Burt Reynolds.

MARISHA: Oh right.

MATT: We'll take about five more minutes of questions. Five or ten more minutes of questions, then we gotta take off.

LIAM: How long will you be doing this show? 30 years.

MATT: Considering we've been playing for two and a half years, and everyone's level nine, we can keep going for quite some time. Whether or not we continue past that, means either we do a new campaign, or we go into epic or mythic levels? We'll cross that bridge when we get to it. I mean, I'd love to keep playing for as long as people wanna play, but also people get busy, life changes, we'll see how it goes. I'm in for the long haul as much as everyone else is.

LIAM: Matt, multiple people are asking what the music is that we're hearing on the show.

MATT: What you hear in the show is a combination of a gentlemen named Kevin Macleod, who has a website called Incompetech, which he produces really amazing, royalty-free musical tracks. I've used them for many web series for many years. He's very talented, and I contacted him, and asked him permission to use on the stream. He's like, “Yeah, anything on Twitch, go for it.” And the other half are a lot of soundscapes I use from a company called Platemail Games, which make great custom RPG soundscapes, and some tracks that are just creepy, and dwarf cityscapes, and dark forest night. It's a great, great resource. Those are my two big ones for this Twitch stream.

ORION: And yes, we did roll for our starting stats.

MATT: Yeah it was 4d6, drop the lowest, arrange as desired. So it was a powerful campaign.

LIAM: What was the most nail-biting moment the group has seen? It was Pike's death.

MARISHA: Pike dying.

MATT: Definitely. Do you prefer being the DM, or do you like mixing it up and being characters? I never get a chance to play games really. It's kind of one of those, always a DM, never a bride circumstance.

LIAM: You wanna play with my kid?

MATT: Yeah. I'll be an evil character and murder them all, you're going to regret it immediately, make 'em just cry.

LIAM: “Listen, that's the game, suck it up!”

MATT: Yeah, turn it into Mazes and Monsters.

TALIESIN: Is that why you play so much War Machine, is because for once you don't have to be responsible?

MATT: Probably. I occasionally, I got to play a game of Diaspora for a while, with Philip Eisner, the guy who wrote Event Horizon. So playing a sci-fi kind of horror-based universe with him running, that was great. That was very brief.

LIAM: Matt, can you give us any teasers of things to come?

MATT: No. See as they happen, man, that's part of the fun, the mystery of it all. I know what's coming. I got stuff planned for years. It's gonna be fun.

LIAM: Do you have any advice to get into voice acting? Learn to act, study acting, go to where the work is, keep acting, in anything, in fucking anything. Go to where the work is. Act.

MATT: What age did you play your first tabletop RPG game? For me it was Second Edition Dungeons & Dragons, and it was freshman year of high school.

TALIESIN: GURPS, 13. I was, yeah, 13 years old, GURPS.

ASHLEY: Favorite tabletop games, not D&D?

LIAM: Get Hulk Hogan to play.

ORION: That's not D&D?

TALIESIN: Mansions of Madness.

MARISHA: Mansions of Madness is great.

ORION: Is MTG, Magic the Gathering a tabletop? Is that considered tabletop?

MARISHA: It's a card building game.

ORION: Magic.

MARISHA: War Machine.

MATT: War Machine is really fun.

MARISHA: I'm a Cryx player.

MATT: It's awesome.

ASHLEY: I'm just starting.

MATT: You're the awesome Retribution.

ORION: I'm Circle of Orboros.

TALIESIN: We played with Scanlan, of course we do.

TRAVIS: It said do you ever think about sexuality while playing, besides Grog, of course. Scanlan does, I'm sure other people have.

TALIESIN: It's hard not to think about it with Sam.

TRAVIS: We just pay for it.

LIAM: Are we gonna release more background information of your campaign?

MATT: Yes, actually.

LIAM: We are?

MATT: Time has been hard, but I'm trudging through. What I'm gonna make essentially is a video recap of the previous two and a half years of the campaign. I'm gonna narrate it, it's gonna be very simple. It's gonna be just information, with the occasional slides of stuff in the background. But I'm working on a video, kind of like your guys' intros, that'll be a synopsis of the story up until this stream stared.

TRAVIS: Claymation, that's awesome, man.

MATT: I will destroy you, I will fucking stab you.

LIAM: If you want, it's not much, but I have a Vine account that's under the name VoiceofOBrien, and I took a lot of Vine videos from our private game. So it's not a ton, but you'll see us acting like shitheads.

TRAVIS: That's seven seconds at a time.

MARISHA: Seven seconds at a time, yeah. I think I still have the video of you trying to woo the nymph lady.

TRAVIS: Try?

TALIESIN: That was a good video.

MARISHA: It's basically just you flirting with my boyfriend.

TALIESIN: I have some videos of the tarot game, and a couple of us

TRAVIS: Matt is now a nymph.

MATT: Yeah, we sat there, and, hey man, I've had to flirt with quite a few of these people as characters, it's interesting.

LIAM: Who's your favorite NPC that you brought to life for us?

MATT: Oh, that's a tough one. There's been a lot of good ones. I really enjoyed Grimthorn, the dwarf that was–

LIAM: Clarota is pretty good.

MATT: Yeah, Clarota is great. He was the one eyed dwarf with the shave, that was taking you guys to the fighting ring. He was fun. I'm enjoying Balgus as well, he's a good one.

MARISHA: Ballsack.

LIAM: Ballsack.

MARISHA: Do we have nicknames for all of our NPCs?

MATT: You know, I really enjoy Arcanist Allura Vysoren.

ORION: So do I!

MATT: She's an awesome, powerful, headstrong elven sorceress, who is part of a, not a secret, but a very powerful circle of magic practitioners around the world, and also a member of the council of Tal'Dorei. She's one of the largest allies that this group has had through a lot of the adventure arcs, and I love playing her, she's great.

LIAM: Grog, have you even thrown a gnome as an attack.

TRAVIS: The very first time we played, I picked up Sam and chucked him across a room. That was full of a trap.

MARISHA: Fastball special.

TRAVIS: And it worked. It was awesome.

MATT: What character type would I play if I ever got a chance to play? I would probably be a bard. I wanna make a bard that actually conducts the battle. Meaning, sits there and watches the fight, and he's conducting, like music happens when other people attack. Cymbals go off, and drum beats, and all of his abilities are tied to music, so he's actually conducting the battle like a symphony. That's what I wanna make.

MARISHA: That's cool.

ASHLEY: That's badass.

MATT: One day.

LIAM: Would you ever play an evil character? My contingency plan, if I get killed, I don't know about evil, but he won't be as nice as Vax.

MATT: Evil characters have to be discussed with the DM. I'm iffy on the evil character, unless they have a good reason, and a personality that isn't going to completely derail the campaign. Doing an evil campaign, that's fine. But if you're building a character that is going to inherently be a troll, and basically diminish everybody else's good time in the story, it becomes a problem.

ZAC: It's the internet though, man.

MATT: I know. If you make a cool, interesting evil character, that can be evil but still like, like a good example would be in Baldur's Gate, Edwin.

ZAC: What if one of your guests, that came on for one night, would they be allowed to be?

MATT: Yeah, they'd be allowed to. They may not survive.

ORION: Tiberius might not–

MARISHA: Or kill them.

LIAM: I don't know about evil, but if I have to come back, I might be a lot more selfish.

MATT: In it cool news, tabletop columnist, offering to DM a game for me. I may have to hit you up on that some time. 'Cause that'd be awesome.

TALIESIN: He deserves a break.

ZAC: How do you remember all the voices that you've done of the NPC's over the years?

MATT: I make notes and audio files.

TRAVIS: You do?

MATT: I do. As a reminder in case I forget.

TRAVIS: Jarvis.

(all laugh)

MATT: I have notes written next to every NPC, like an accent or dialect that I chose for them, a general texture. Kind of like what you'd see for breakdowns for a character you're auditioning for. I basically make that for each NPC to remind me of what I've done. And if it's a particularly weird voice that I don't know if I could replicate in the future, after the session I'll go and do a little audio file of me doing the voice so I can go back to it later.

TRAVIS: You're a freak of nature, man.

TALIESIN: Seriously.

MATT: Good question.

MARISHA: There's a lot that goes into it. I think Matt, just to put it into perspective, for everyone in the chat room, I think Matt probably spends close to eight hours, at least, on each time before we play. Or I guess at least we used to.

MATT: For our big session, I'd spend as much time preparing as we did playing. I'll put it that way, I spend as much time preparing as we play. So for these sessions, I'm spending about three hours a week, preparing, what, three to four hours a week? For old sessions that was bigger.

LIAM: Someone asked, what was the reaction to discovering you had a magic flying carpet? Which you can see if you go to Matt's YouTube channel. There's a video that Ashley made of us playing, and you see our reactions to that.

MARISHA: Who was it, was it you, or Vex? That tried to float down with the carpet, and then we realized it was magic?

LIAM: Yeah, underneath.

MARISHA: But we tried to just use it like a parachute.

MATT: It was a crumbling tower, it was Allura's tower. You guys went into, realized she was missing, because the tower had been attacked. You set off essentially a defense system of her arcane tower, which caused it to crumble into a tiny pearl.

ORION: Tiberius jumped out the window and just cast Featherfall.

MATT: Yeah, and just kinda glided away. You turned into an eagle and grabbed the gnomes. The rest of the party had to try to rapidly escape a crumbling tower that was compacting on to itself.

MARISHA: I think it was mainly the twins in the tower.

LIAM: Hey, Grog almost died once. He fell from a great–

MATT: You fall a lot, but when you fall on to something, that thing is fucked.

MATT: All right, we're winding down here, 'cause we gotta leave here shortly guys. Two more questions.

LIAM: Three more questions.

ZAC: Closing messages before you guys go, too.

MATT: Oh yeah, all right, so we'll do a couple more questions, then we'll go to closing messages. Who wants to pick?

LIAM: Let's make it a magic three.

MARISHA: Let's do a good one.

MATT: Three, three questions, make 'em quick. Let's see.

MARISHA: Waiting for a good one.

MATT: How much does Grog weigh? Grog weighs approximately 600 pound we decided.

TRAVIS: Just under 700.

MATT: So he's kinda rough.

TRAVIS: It's all muscle, bitch.

MATT: Yeah it is. Muscle and brains.

TRAVIS: Muscle and wang. 500 pounds and a hundred-pound wang.

MATT: Any of you consider running a game for fans of the stream? Actually, I've run a couple games at conventions for some groups. I had a couple of sessions I ran, actually in conjunction with Wizards, they sent stuff out for us.

TALIESIN: And for charity.

MATT: Yeah, we've had some charity D&D games out here in L.A. So we've done them before. I'd consider it if there was time available, and a venue that allowed it. So if it does happen, we'll definitely announce it here.

TRAVIS: Best item in your inventory?

ORION: That's for a magic item?

TRAVIS: Oh, did we already say that? I'm just blanking.

ORION: No.

TALIESIN: It's hard to read this quickly.

MATT: You guys have some good questions.

TRAVIS: My brain's turning into applesauce.

ASHLEY: I know, me too.

LIAM: Do you realize how lucky you all are to have such a nice group of friends?

ALL: Yes.

MATT: Very much so.

TALIESIN: The world is cold and unfeeling.

LIAM: Let's close it on that. I love these guys.

MATT: And I like to think that this is, because there are so many good people out there in the world, and we were lucky enough to find each other through weird circumstances. And there are so many good people in the world out there, don't close yourself off to it. You'd be surprised how many awesome–

TRAVIS: How long does it usually take the woman in the back to tie her boot?

MARISHA: I'm multi-tasking.

MATT: No, that's the question we end it on. That's the question.

MARISHA: I've just been tightening my laces while I've been kicking it back here.

ZAC: I'm gonna squeeze in here really quick. So I have some thank you's I wanna call out while you guys are here. I figured they'd appreciate me calling them out the most while you guys were on screen. 'Cause they like you guys for some reason.

ALL: Aw.

ZAC: So these are all people that have sent us stuff off Amazon, to help make the studio better. So Danielle Denny.

ASHLEY: Thanks Danielle!

MATT: Danielle, thank you so much Danielle.

ZAC: Bradley Dealman?

MARISHA: Dalman.

MATT: Bradley Dalman.

LIAM: Do we know what they sent us? Can you tell us some of the things they sent?

ZAC: I have, I– Well I mean they're like– new microphones for that station and lights.

MARISHA: That's amazing.

ZAC: Wii controllers.

MATT: Brad, thank you, that's amazing.

ZAC: And other stuff for tech we needed that we didn't have. Shane and Russell said thanks for all your hard work, and everything you are doing.

MATT: Aw. Thank you Shane!

ZAC: Ty Odlinger.

ASHLEY: Ty!

ZAC: Timothy B. Hudson.

ASHLEY: Timothy!

ZAC: Timothy B. Hudson, he went nuts.

MATT: Timothy!

TALIESIN: Triple threat.

ZAC: Kathel T. Stockdale.

ASHLEY: Cool name, Kathel.

ZAC: Yeah, that's rad. Luis Archuletta.

MATT: Luis Archeletta!

ASHLEY: Luis!

ZAC: Steve Chua.

MATT: Steve!

ZAC: Here's a little something to help you guys out. Another one from Chua, here's a little something to help you guys out. And I know there's more coming in, this is what we've got so far. Thanks everybody.

MATT: That's so cool guys, thank you.

ZAC: And they also have asked that a couple of you guys come on Honesty Hour sometime.

LIAM: What is that?

ZAC: It's a show I do on Monday nights, where it's 100% no-holds-barred. I will answer any question that they ask.

TRAVIS: What?

ORION: I would love to do that.

TRAVIS: Sounds like a horrifying idea.

ZAC: Okay, they've asked specifically for Ashley, they've asked for Matt, and as for, actually I think everyone has been asked at one point in time. So I'll say maybe I'll have you guys once a month.

ASHLEY: When is Honesty Hour?

ZAC: It's usually Monday nights from nine to, whenever the fuck. Like it went to 1:30AM the other night.

CREW: Isn't it really an Honesty Time?

ZAC: Don't do it! It's only for subscribers. It's not that bad, because they ask really great questions, a lot of them have been about how have you gotten through certain aspects of depression, or what kind of thing–

MARISHA: Oh that's good.

ZAC: It's pretty inspirational.

LIAM: How many times have you been hit in the nuts in your life?

ZAC: I can say twice. And would probably explained how it happened, and what I did. It's just story time. Sometimes the questions get a little inappropriate.

MATT: That's okay.

ZAC: That's fine.

MATT: But like for the most part, the audience here's been so awesome, they're all super intelligent with great questions. I'd be down, I'd totally be down.

ASHLEY: Wait, is this Noncompliant?

ZAC: Yeah.

MATT: Oh, that's awesome. Yeah, I got the Noncompliant tattoo this week, actually.

MARISHA: Oh yeah, I saw your picture.

ASHLEY: That's amazing.

ZAC: We have a comic book show on Tuesday.

TRAVIS: (air-horn sound)

ZAC: Real talk with Zac. But thank you guys so much for doing this. The subscribers really wanted to do it, so hopefully you guys enjoyed as well. And we will come back next week.

TRAVIS: Yeah!

ASHLEY: Yay!

ZAC: Tomorrow, if you guys are at Wonder Con, are any of you guys gonna be at Wonder Con?

TALIESIN: Saturday.

MARISHA: I don't know, maybe.

ORION: I'll be there Saturday.

MATT: I'm sadly not gonna be there.

ZAC: I will be there tomorrow from 12:30 to one, for a meet and greet, which I'm going to pretend is an autograph signing, and I'm going to bring my own pictures.

MATT: Yeah!

ZAC: We're gonna have fun with it. Going in costume. Becca and I are going in costume, and then Hector and Ify will be at four. And then Hector and Ify are doing a Q and A, or no, a trivia game that night on the stage for Geek & Sundry and stuff like that. So Geek & Sundry will be there, you guys should stop by.

LIAM: Thanks for all those greater than three's, guys.

MATT: Less than three's.

TALIESIN: Greater than three, too.

ZAC: The computer, the story behind that, is during the charity drive, we had a robot read off all the donation messages. And the robot would say, and when they made a heart, it would say, “We less than three.”

MATT: So beautiful.

ZAC: So we turned that into a thing.

LIAM: (robot voice) We less than three you.

MATT: It fucks me up every time you do that.

ZAC: Cool. Thanks guys!

TALIESIN: Forgot you speak-and-spell.

ZAC: Thank you so much.

MARISHA: Bye. 

Pre-Show

MATT: Hello everyone, welcome to the fifth episode of Critical Role! Before we start and get into the videos for our initial intro, let me go over a couple of things for the evening. First off, we're shooting to get to 1,500 subscribers by this evening, and as soon as we get there, we're giving out a promo kit that's worth about $250, which is awesome. We'll all go ahead and sign it at the end of the day and get it out to you as well. Also, Tabletop Day is coming up this Saturday, and a few of us will be showing up during the stream as well and any of you guys playing your own tabletop games at home, or whatever the case may be, if you go to the website and register, for each person that registers, we're giving away a boardgame to the charity Big Brothers and Big Sisters, so that's a really, really cool thing that you guys should get involved with. That's this Saturday, at International Tabletop Day, and also, we received a present apparently from the audience.

TRAVIS: A present?

MATT: That I get to open.

LIAM: Vat eez zis present?

[static]

MATT: I don't know vat zis present eez, but now I get to open zis.

ALL: Ooh!

MATT: This is for all of us, apparently.

TALIESIN: What kind of sack is that?

MATT: It is a big– oh, it is a gigantic sack.

ORION: Ooh, I love gigantic sacks

MATT: Oh my god guys, this is, this is amazing!

LAURA: There's a card on it.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: On the other side.

MATT: There's a card? Oh snap. By the power of #TeamNoStream, you have the power. By Negihama, thank you Negihama.

ALL: Thank you Negihama!

MATT: That's amazing, as we now have for the group, a castle Greyskull.

ALL: Huzzah! Yay!

MATT: So during the intro break we're going to go ahead and open this and find a place for it nearby, 'cause this is now representative of the keep that the players have waiting for them at Emon once they get out of this horrible mess. Anyway guys, welcome to Critical Role, let's get into those intros, shall we?

ASHLEY: Pike grew up in the outskirts of town, near the Bramblewood. Her ancestors were a family of deep gnomes with quite an unfavorable reputation. Thievery, destruction, and trickery left them with the curse of the last name of Trickfoot. Sarenrae, the goddess of healing and redemption, had other plans for Pike's great-great-grandfather Wilhand, who left his family at a young age after a dream– a dream that changed the course of the Trickfoot family. Wilhand devoted his life to Sarenrae, and pledged from then on that him and his family would live a life of service and devotion. As a child, Pike seemed to have an affinity to heal. Whether it was animals, people, or even flowers, she felt she had a purpose in making things whole that had once been broken. She studied and learned the ways to heal through divine magic. She lived a peaceful life, quiet and simple, until one day, Wilhand was captured and almost killed by a group of goliath barbarians. One of the goliaths took a stand against the murder of the innocent gnome, and he himself was beaten, bloodied, and left for dead, abandoned by his herd. Wilhand went to Pike for help. She prayed, and healed this barbarian as best she could, bringing him back to life. When he awoke, she discovered his name was Grog Srongjaw. After that, they were the best of friends, a rather unlikely pair. Little did she know that in a few years' time, Grog would soon return the favor and bring her back from the clutches of death. After being killed in battle, Pike felt angry. She wanted to be stronger, so that it would never happen again. She spent four months at sea, training with the men and women aboard a ship called The Broken Howl. Gripping her holy symbol in one hand, and her morningstar in the other, this time, Pike is ready.
Part I

MATT: Welcome back, guys. So we finally have Pike's video finished, so I hope you got to enjoy that. As a heads-up, too, unfortunately we're going to be down one Scanlan due to work, but that's okay, the bard will be in our hearts this evening, and you're welcome to tweet at him angrily to make sure he makes the next session.

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: So, without further ado, let's go and kick into the recap. So, the party has initially been sent down on a mission by the arcanist Allura Vysoren in search of a halfling paladin who has gone missing, named Lady Kima of Vord. A folk hero and a very respected individual, she went on a vision quest and apparently went alone into Kraghammer seeking some sort of great evil that was festering beneath the city, and hasn't been seen for weeks and weeks. The party was hired by her to go and try to find her whereabouts and hopefully bring her back safely. Since traversing and meeting individuals in Kraghammer, they then spearheaded into the Greyspine Mines where apparently these monstrosities have been burbling out time and time again over the past few weeks. Pushing down, they had encountered umber hulks, they managed to inquire some duergar, which, apparently there's a lot of them down here. Duergar being an ashy-skinned, subterranean dark, evil dwarf-type offshoot. One of which had with it a brain-type quadruped that managed to Brain Spike Grog and send him catatonic for a short time. They, wandering through the caverns, discovered there was a duergar war camp across the way from– across this large chasm that was currently being run by a general duergar alongside what appeared to be, and what they've now discovered to be, a mind flayer or an illithid. They managed to, upon looking deeper into this cavern, finding hidden behind a waterfall, thanks to the druid and the ranger, completely stealing from the rest of the group their flying carpet, made a very tenuous relationship and alignment with another mind flayer, apparently cast out of his own society, searching to find a way to both get revenge and find his way back into his colony of people. And his name was Clarota, lovingly called Clarence by the group, probably much to his own chagrin. After which they decided to go ahead and try to extract information from this duergar general, and stop this war camp from preparing itself for battle and attack, seemingly, on Kraghammer in the near future. Through a strange, crazy plan they came up with, they managed to fly undetected over via flying carpet and eagle, and floating sorcerer, over the entire war camp, made a Metal Gear run into the center of their main barracks–

(all laugh)

MATT: – threw a bucket of goblin shit into the face of the one mind flayer–

ASHLEY: Whoops.

MATT: – after which, Vax bisected it, pretty much, in one surprise round of attacks that led to a large battle in the center of this building, partway through which ground began to rumble. And then digging a forth from underneath, a bulette, a gargantuan armored, burrowing creature that was hungry and very dangerous that then made the battle that much more intense. A heavy, blood-filled battle later, involved with Percy getting his hand caught and firing his gun into the gullet of the beast, eventually it had its armor pulled apart and was defeated by the party. The remnants of the duergar army inside of this building have been destroyed, aside from a few stragglers who have laid their weapons down, and the general now lies beaten, on his knees before the rest of the party. And that is where we pick up and begin. So, as you all are catching your breath, breathing heavily, as the adrenaline slowly leaves the system. Looking around this building, with the large hole still glaring through the roof.

ORION: I'm waving through it.

MATT: Tiberius is waving through it.

LAURA: Oh, you're still up top.

MATT: The general's on the ground, warhammer at his side, blackened armor still kind of sizzling with the arcane energy from his temporary Banishment via Scanlan. He sits there with this kind of gnarled, brackish beard, looking about the rest of you with these wild kind of white-coated eyes. “So you found your way in. What's your purpose? What do you want from me?”

LIAM: Well, Vax walks right up to him and walks behind him and grabs him by the hair, and right back to this position. Let's have a talk.

LAURA: Oh.

LIAM: Would you care to have a chat?

LAURA: Of course I would, thank you.

MATT: “If you want blood, take it. It's all you're getting from me.”

TRAVIS: Okay, kill him.

ALL: No, wait!

ORION: Hold on a second, ask the question.

LAURA: We don't want your blood.

ORION: What are we asking?

LAURA: We're looking for a halfling. Have you seen one?

MATT: “I don't know what you're talking about.”

LAURA: A female halfling. She came down here.

MATT: “Well, she wouldn't have gotten far if she did. Not with my people.”

LIAM: I take my dagger and stick it in about a centimeter and say, your master is gone, it's just you and your friends here now, I think it's in your best interest to talk. You could walk away from here. You don't have to die if you can play nicely.

ORION: And believe me when I tell you he usually kills everybody. He doesn't give that offer very often.

(all laugh)

MATT: Go ahead and make an intimidation roll with advantage.

TRAVIS: First roll of the night. First roll of the night.

ORION: Yeah!

LIAM: Natural 20!

(all laugh and cheer)

MATT: That's a way to start.

MARISHA: The first one tonight!

LAURA: That's the way!

TRAVIS: Probably those eight miles you rode.

ORION: Shush!

MATT: As you pull the blade to his throat, he chuckles deeply against the strain. “Your halfling lass was foolish. We took her. We delivered her to King Murghol as a present. If she lives, she's probably ruined and broken deep within the dungeons of Emberhold. You're welcome to go for her there.”

LIAM: Who's this king of yours?

LAURA: King what?

MARISHA: Murgholt?

MATT: “Murghol.”

ORION: Which way should we head?

MATT: “Ooh, down, probably.”

ORION: I mean, is there any particular shortcuts or less running into your kind along the way, I suppose?

MATT: “I highly doubt it.” He spits in your direction.

ORION: Oh! Prestidigitation. And I catch it and throw it back into his face.

MARISHA: Can I do an insight check to see if he's lying about that?

MATT: Go for it.

TALIESIN: I think we have some prisoners to free or something as well.

LAURA: Yes.

MARISHA: 22.

MATT: He does not appear to be lying about his interpretation of her, apparently she is where he is. As to where her current state is, you don't know, but he seems to have a very, very made-up mind as to her possibility of her being alive still.

MARISHA: What about a secret path that we can maybe get through to avoid some of these people? Was kind of wondering if he's lying.

MATT: You can press him that information even harder.

MARISHA: Hey guys, we should press him for information about this passage.

LIAM: Just a couple of more questions.

LAURA: Can I start speaking to him in Underdark?

MATT: Of course.

LAURA: And I ask him–

MARISHA: That's hot.

LAURA: Yep, it's an awesome language. Tell me about the hidden passages. I know there are some. I am good tonight, you guys

TRAVIS: What does Underdark sound like, by the way?

(all laugh)

LAURA: It sounds kind of like–

TALIESIN: Parseltongue?

LIAM: It's like Pig Latin.

LAURA: (speaking Undercommon)

TRAVIS: Mm, no!

LIAM: Ere-way are the idden-hay assages-pay?

MATT: It's kind of reminiscent of Black Speech from the Tolkien universe, that has that guttural (speaking Black Speech) very, very deep.

LAURA: Oh right, that.

ALL: (speaking Black Speech)

MATT: A little bit like a whispering darkness to it. As she speaks this tongue, it catches a lot of you off guard, you've not heard her use this tongue until this point. Make an intimidation check.

ASHLEY: (gasps) Vex, what are you doing? What is this coming out of your mouth?

TRAVIS: That sounds real pretty.

LAURA: Right, I have my papers.

MATT: Get your sheet ready.

LAURA: Oh noes, hold on, hold on.

MATT: You got your paper today? Lovely.

LIAM: She's bonafide.

LAURA: 18.

MATT: 18. He says, “No passages to the stronghold, but there is a way in. Aside from the front. Good luck getting up in there from that point.”

ASHLEY: Is it through the lake?

MATT: “Yes, through the lake. Deep below, you'll find a tunnel. This tunnel will lead you to a subterranean passage straight to the stronghold.”

LAURA: Can we check to make sure he's not untruthful?

MATT: Make an insight.

LAURA: (groans) Okay. 16?

MATT: No, he's bullshitting through his teeth.

LAURA: Oh, okay.

LIAM: Vex'ahlia?

MATT: Hey, he seemed honest about the passage but dishonest about the– he's basically following her lead. “Uh-huh.”

LAURA: You're lying.

MATT: “Perhaps.”

LAURA: Tell us true, where is it?

MATT: “If I tell you, will you let me live?”

TRAVIS: Ooh. Well.

TALIESIN: I think that's very reasonable.

LAURA: I think that's reasonable. We'll–

MATT: “I'm essentially–”

TALIESIN: We will not kill you.

LAURA: I think we can–

TRAVIS: We can lock him up. And then kill him.

LIAM: We'll leave you alive.

LAURA: We'll leave you alive.

LIAM: Yes.

MATT: “Don't just leave me alive. Give me a chance to walk from this building, on my own, arms intact.”

TRAVIS: No.

MATT: “And I'll give you the secret entrance to Emberhold itself, leading you straight within the throne room.”

ORION: Well, that's a good thing.

TALIESIN: So we have to leave you alive, and let you leave this building intact?

MATT: “Correct.”

TRAVIS: I go over and pick up his warhammer and say, you may– maybe– leave. But I get to keep this as a souvenir.

TALIESIN: I actually think this is an appropriate moment to play with a bit of banditry. I say we take everything from him and he can make his way out all on his own.

TRAVIS: I like that idea.

LAURA: Yeah–

MARISHA: Ooh, that's fun.

LAURA: – all his clothes, everything.

TRAVIS: Butt naked.

LIAM: And you can advise–

MARISHA: Wait, wait, hang on.

ORION: As is his undergarments on for–

TRAVIS: Why?

ORION: I don't care to see that.

MARISHA: Why don't we take him with us? Just in casies–

MATT: At which point, a cold, clammy hand touches your shoulder and pulls you aside as–

MARISHA: Ew.

MATT: – a partially hooded Clarota steps forward and says, “I'll attempt to read his surface thoughts. If he tries to keep it from me, I'll know.”

TRAVIS: Smart, smart!

MATT: As he steps forward, he puts one hand in front of him and his eyes gleam with a sickly green hue. You can see the general tips his head back for a second and begins twitching an eye. Sweat begins to bead around his brow as Clarota takes another step forward, tensing his hand once more, his head beginning to bow forward with an intensity, a force of focus towards his direction. You can now see the general, “Let me live. Let me go and I'll tell you. This isn't necessary. I'm willing to give you the information.” You can see a trickle of blood begin to pour out of one of his nostrils.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

ORION: That's a mind flayer.

LAURA: What do we do? I think we should stop him. Should we stop him?

LIAM: Clarota.

LAURA: Wait.

LIAM: Does he know anything about K'varn?

MATT: “Let me see.” And the mind flayer pushes once more into his brain. You see a twitch to his face as his head kind of lolls back and rolls for a second, resisting as best he can. But his will is currently being beaten by the defeat of the battle, the lack of his compatriot mind flayer, and the sheer intensity of Clarota now focused on vengeance and returning to his people. The blood beings to stream not just from his nostrils, but from his ears as well. As Clarota releases him for a second, he goes, “He has not seen K'varn, but knows a bit of his nature. I cannot read it, but we could press for more information.”

LIAM: I walk up–

LAURA: I think we should just ask him.

LIAM: – next to Clarota, push the dwarf against the wall, and say, our friend here is not as patient as I am. We want to know about this K'varn, and we want you and all your men, all your little mates here, to throw your weapons into the chasm, you can go fuck off, but we want to know everything. And this is your last chance. Right now, right here. Talk.

TRAVIS: And you have to get naked.

LAURA: (whispers) And you have to get naked.

LIAM: That's correct.

ORION: Will you stop with the naked? Grog–

TRAVIS: What?

TALIESIN: I'm with you on that.

TRAVIS: Thank you.

ASHLEY: Yeah, me too.

MARISHA: It's starting to become a thing now. I'm just saying.

MATT: “K'varn was responsible for forging the alliance. For centuries and generations, his people and mine killed and fought. It wasn't until K'varn came that we decided to work together for a common cause. Expansion, unification, dominion over this land and these mountains. Divided, we were weak, petty, greedy. With K'varn leading us, we have purpose, we have growth. We could take what we'd like, and I'm but one dwarf. If I fall over here, many more will take over where I fell.”

TALIESIN: Well, we can see that's obviously worked out really well for you. I think that I'm satisfied, are you satisfied?

LAURA: What kind of creature is K'varn?

LIAM: What is K'varn?

MATT: “I have not seen K'varn personally.”

LAURA: But you've heard rumors, though?

MATT: “What I know of K'varn– a being of immense intelligence. A creature that needs not walk this earth, one that does not touch the land that it traverses. I know it sees all, it smiles from a toothy maw and laughs, laughs in the darkness. Protruding from its forehead, one nasty, gnarled black horn, terrible source of its dark power. That is what's beneath here.”

LAURA: Is he telling the truth?

MATT: Insight check.

LIAM: Insight check for me as well.

TALIESIN: Would I recognize this creature he's describing?

MATT: Go ahead and make a nature check. Or arcana, either one.

MARISHA: Can I assist him?

TALIESIN: Or arcana? 14.

MARISHA: Can I do a nature check?

MATT: This'll be more for your own personal knowledge, probably not. But you can make one yourself.

MARISHA: Well, that's what I'm saying.

TALIESIN: 14.

MARISHA: 'Cause you're doing arcana?

TALIESIN: I did arcana.

ORION: A d20 roll.

MARISHA: I'm doing nature. 29, nature.

MATT: All right, so. No natural creature you've ever heard has this type of essence to it, having a single black horn.

LIAM: It's clearly a narwhal.

MATT: It is.

LIAM: It's a sentient narwhal.

MATT: It's an awful, awful narwhal. Way to spoil the story, Liam.

MARISHA: Demon narwhal.

ASHLEY: (singsong) Well, maybe we should go.

MATT: Gnashing teeth, black horn, very intelligent. That doesn't seem to be anything from nature itself. From your experience, there are different entities, but usually there are multiple horns. Singular, demonic beings that would have extreme intelligence, sharp teeth, horns, and you've had brief brushes in the past with demonic entities that seems to run in a similar vein, but nothing in particular is creeping into mind. It's going to be difficult for you to specifically come up with this, with what little information you currently have. Yeah.

ORION: Well, I'm satisfied.

LIAM: I am, too.

LAURA: Maybe we should let him go.

LIAM: Why don't you strip?

ORION: I agree.

TRAVIS: Do you wanna handcuff him?

ASHLEY: Take off your clothes!

LAURA: Yeah, let's take his– We take Grog's handcuffs out of his bag.

MATT: “Let me– That was not the deal! You leave me, unspoiled, on my life, and I tell you the way into Emberhold.”

LAURA: Well, tell us!

ORION: Take the hammer. That's rough on him. Leave his armor on.

LAURA: You haven't told us yet, have you?

LIAM: We already told you your weapons are ours.

TALIESIN: In fact, we'll be keeping your weapons, your armor, and I believe, your pride.

MARISHA: Yes.

LAURA: But your life is yours.

TALIESIN: You may even outrun the dwarves we're about to set free.

ORION and TRAVIS: Oh good, yeah.

TRAVIS: Nice! Percy's fucked-up tonight, I like it.

TALIESIN: I'm in a mood.

MATT: “Emberhold.”

LIAM: He tried to make a book out of someone's flesh once.

LAURA: Wait, wait. He's telling us, shut up.

LIAM: Yes, sorry.

MATT: “Emberhold is the fortress of our people, built to resist assault from all sides.”

LIAM: Shite.

MATT: “We've an army, hiding about the outskirts of it. Kind of like an army you might have in one of yours, if you think you have a chance. However, since I don't think that's what you carry, your best bet is on the left side of the fortress. There are two streams of molten rock that pour down the side. The smaller of those two streams covers a secret tunnel.”

LIAM: Insight check. Is he full of shit? I rolled– Oh, nothing too hot at all. Never mind, forget it. Forget I said anything.

MATT: All right. He seems to be forthright and honest with his information. “However, that'll take you through the lava. That's up to you. It's meant to open from the inside. A trapdoor-like mechanism that spreads the actual flow. From the outside, well, good luck. I've done my side of the bargain. Let me free.”

LIAM: Stepping behind, I take my knife, and I cut his belt loose and let his pants fall, and I give him a little nudge.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: You're free to go. Not toward your stronghold, but towards the surface.

MATT: So his belt falls, changepurse, and everything. He is wearing full plate black armor–

LIAM: Sure.

MATT: So his trousers do not plummet.

LIAM: Aw, that's a shame.

TRAVIS: Can't we have Scanlan turn him into a porpoise?

MATT: He picks up his warhammer.

TRAVIS: I don't think so. No, that's mine. As a token to remember you by.

MATT: “Unspoiled was the deal.”

LIAM: Wasn't the deal.

TRAVIS: No, it's great. You can really argue all you want to, or I'll just smash your fucking head in.

LIAM: Wasn't the deal!

TALIESIN: Alive was the deal.

LIAM: We said you were alive, your weapons were ours. What, have you got shit in your ears?

ORION: I thought you meant you wouldn't get dirty, like you know, not spoiled. Which I was totally fine with.

MATT: Takes a couple of steps forward towards you, holding the warhammer out.

LIAM: Your skull is unspoiled.

MATT: Suddenly, he turns completely invisible, vanishes from sight.

LAURA: My perception's really high, can I try to find him?

LIAM: Yeah, we can. Perception check.

TRAVIS: You dicks.

MATT: You hear (footsteps running).

LIAM: Perception check.

LAURA: Wait, no!

ORION: He's gone.

LAURA: Mother bitch.

MARISHA: It's fine.

LIAM: 18 for me.

MARISHA: Just let him go, it's all he's got.

ASHLEY: We should throw something.

TRAVIS: (high-pitched) I want the hammer!

MARISHA: It's all he's got right now. He's naked, and now he's invisible running through a cavern.

LAURA: He's not naked!

MATT: At this point–

LIAM: I'm gonna attack him.

MATT: Before you have the opportunity–

LIAM: Yeah?

MATT: – he becomes visible again, about 20 feet out, gone down the stairs and towards the front door and he just–

LIAM: I'm throwing a dagger at him.

MARISHA: Oh look.

MATT: Go for it.

LIAM: Yeah.

TRAVIS: And I'm throwing my ax at him with the chain of returning as well.

LIAM: Oh good, that's great. 28 for me.

ORION: Oh shit.

MATT: All right, that hits.

LIAM: Yeah, sure it does. Dick!

MATT: It's not a Sneak Attack, just damage.

LIAM: Yeah, that's fine.

MATT: You chuck your ax at him.

TRAVIS: 17.

MARISHA: And I just yell, sorry!

MATT: Okay.

TRAVIS: 17.

LIAM: Ten for me.

MATT: All right, so go ahead and roll damage for both of you.

LIAM: Ten.

MATT: He is there, standing in place with his arms locked like this.

LAURA: Oh, Clarota.

TRAVIS: 15.

MATT: 15 damage?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MATT: All righty.

TRAVIS: Should've left the hammer.

LIAM: Ten.

MATT: Ten damage, all right. There's now a significant amount of blood beginning to pool down his feet, as he's standing there. As he is frozen in place, Clarota just kinda steps up to the front of him, grabs his cheeks and pulls his head in towards him, as his tendrils slowly wrap around his head. You can see them meet at the back of his skull, and with this horrible crunching sound, you see his head shudder, as his limbs go limp.

LIAM: (sings) Do do do do doo, I'm lovin' it.

(all laugh)

MATT: A few moments of this horrible slurping sound–

LAURA: Oh no.

MATT: – and you hear this dull, sickening, hollow (suction) sound. The tentacles release, Clarota releases his grip from his head, and the captain falls onto his back, a giant bloodied hole in the center of his skull.

ASHLEY: He ate his brain?

TRAVIS: I guess you should've left the hammer, shouldn't you?

TALIESIN: Some people are terrible losers, just really terrible.

ORION: I'm going to loot the body.

LAURA: Yeah, well. Yeah, we definitely do that.

TRAVIS: I would like to pick up the hammer.

MARISHA: This is a good lesson, to no one else that's watching.

ORION: Clarota, that was incredible. Well done!

LAURA: Clarota–

ASHLEY: Clarota, I am a fan.

MARISHA: No one is watching this valuable lesson.

TALIESIN: Do not be an oathbreaker.

MARISHA: To not be an oathbreaker.

TALIESIN: Know when you've lost your clothes.

LAURA: Was that actually, like, a meal for you?

MATT: As you're looking, you can see there's that kind of weird purplish crimson around his tendrils, as he kinda wipes it off with his hands, and goes, “It's enough to sustain me a while. I was getting hungry.”

LAURA: Well. Better him than us, I say.

TRAVIS: Right. Me, I'm just an appetizer.

ORION: Yes, indeed.

LAURA: Loot the body!

MATT: Yes, so you loot the body. You find amongst all the duergar bodies here, as you're quickly jumping around and grabbing, it's hard to count the exact amount, but you're looking at somewhere in the neighbourhood of about five to six hundred gold pieces. You'll have to check later.

LAURA: Ooh!

LIAM: Mm-hm.

LAURA: I write that down.

ORION: He was a general.

MATT: A series of black iron weapons. None of them seem to, at a quick glance, have any sort of magical value. The blackened plate armor on the duergar itself does radiate a magical essence, as does the warhammer he was holding.

LAURA: Is it just him wearing the black plate armor–

MATT: Yeah.

LAURA: – or any of the other bodies wearing it, too?

MATT: There are a few that are wearing black plate, but they're not equivalent enchanted.

LAURA: We should take that and put it in the bag of holding, so we can sneak in if we want to.

TRAVIS: Okay.

LIAM: Tiberius, can you tell us anything about these things?

LAURA: How many sets were there?

MATT: From what is in here, that would be 11 sets, total.

ORION: Yes, that hammer is amazing, obviously, because we saw it in action. I'd say Grog should have it.

LAURA: 11 sets of armor!

MATT: Because there were also sets that were on the rack at the very front.

LAURA: Nice!

ASHLEY: Hey.

MARISHA: Is Grog about to get a new weapon?

TRAVIS: 11 sets of armor, okay.

ORION: And I'll do an arcana check, right? An arcana check on the stuff?

MATT: An arcana check, yeah.

TALIESIN: Laura, you got a grapple arrow, last I gave you, by the way.

LAURA: I did?

ORION: 23.

TALIESIN: Yeah, I got it– you now have a trap arrow.

LAURA: A grappler arrow?

TALIESIN: Yeah, you fire it and it prones somebody.

LAURA: Seriously? That's so cool, thank you!

MATT: There you go, sir.

TALIESIN: I'm gonna Hawkeye you out at some point.

LAURA: Oh my gosh.

TALIESIN: I know.

TRAVIS: Can you do a magical check on the– Oh, he's got it.

ORION: I did.

MATT: So, as Tiberius is looking over the equipment, kind of poring through his arcane knowledge.

ORION: Oh, oh, ooh! I think Pike and Grog would benefit from these, most definitely. Here.

LAURA: What is it? What was it?

LIAM: There's not any kind of dark magic about the armor, is there?

ORION: I mean, it's dark in color.

LIAM: Yes, that's fine.

ORION: But it's, you know, your standard arcana magic.

ASHLEY: Clarota, so when you eat their brains, do you also get their thoughts, maybe?

TRAVIS: Ooh! The heavy plate armor has resistance to fire damage.

ASHLEY: Or it's just– it's gone after that.

TRAVIS: The warhammer–

LIAM: Sh!

MATT: “There are residual memories, thoughts. It's delicious.” And you can see, there's this almost rapturous look in his face you haven't seen before. For a moment, Clarota looks a little younger, a little stronger, a little more dangerous. And you're put off a little bit by it.

TRAVIS: Clarota is Dracula.

MATT: But there's kind of this momentary kind of relishing in the moment and–

MARISHA: Do we need to give you a moment alone? We can leave.

MATT: “He speaks the truth about the path into the Emberhold.”

LAURA: All right.

LIAM: So, he spoke of some sort of trap door that's easy to open from within, but not from outside, correct?

MARISHA: It was hidden by a lava flow.

LAURA: Yes, two lava flows–

MATT: The smaller of the two.

LAURA: – the smaller of the two.

LIAM: The smaller of the two.

MATT: On the left side.

MARISHA: On the left side of the keep.

LAURA: Yes. Can I ask a question?

MATT: Yes?

TRAVIS: I'm raising my hand.

LAURA: Are there a lot of other soldiers still in the camp, or did we–

MATT: Oh, there are plenty of soldiers still in the camp.

LIAM: Yeah, we–

LAURA: Ooh.

MATT: You stealthed into the barracks.

LAURA: Oh shit! We should've kept him alive, you guys! Okay, okay, okay. Yes, Grog?

LIAM: Well, he was about to walk out the door and cause mayhem.

ORION: That's true.

MARISHA: That's true. He was gonna alert everybody.

TRAVIS: Can I harvest any natural armor from the bulette? The kitty?

LAURA: Ooh!

MATT: You can certainly try. There's plates that have been broken and cracked. You can try and start cleaving away at it.

TRAVIS: All right, yes, I start butchering, or something, the bulette.

MATT: Okay, you start– It's really tough hide. You know, 'cause you tried to cut through before and you managed to make a few marks. It takes you a few minutes. You manage to get, let's say, about three saucer-shaped pieces of armor out of it.

TRAVIS: All right.

MATT: You could definitely get more, but then you start hearing bells going off.

LAURA and TRAVIS: Shit.

ORION: What do I see? I'm still on the roof.

LAURA: Okay, we should all– Can we all–

MATT: You don't see anything yet. You just hear bells starting to go off in the city.

LAURA: Okay, we should all put on black armor. Does that matter?

LIAM: We should just get out of here. Keyleth, can you fucking eagle up and let's go.

MATT: You start hearing horns.

LAURA: We need to free those dwarves.

MARISHA: Eagle up?

MATT: Big horns. You start seeing torches being lit.

LAURA: Stealth, stealth. And get out. Go stealth and get out.

LIAM: We need to get out, now.

ORION: Oh guys, the jig is up!

LAURA: I shoot my grapple thing and go up out of the ceiling.

LIAM: Tiberius.

ORION: What?

LIAM: Cast Fly on this fucker right here, we need to get out of here. We just need to get out the way we came in.

MARISHA: I cast Pass Without A Trace. Everyone stand near me. And I'll turn into an eagle and I scoop up the gnomes.

MATT: Okay, what's the radius on Pass Without A Trace?

LIAM: Like a thousand yards.

MARISHA: Like a hundred yards.

MATT: Four miles, it's all I got.

LAURA: But I take the dust of tracelessness out of the bag of holding and I sprinkle it around the room.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Can we grapple up out from the ceiling?

MATT: Well, the arrow that you have that he made, it's essentially an arrow that bursts into a tanglefoot bag. When it bursts, it grapples whoever's there, it's not like grappling an arrow.

TALIESIN: Yeah, it's not like a string arrow, although I'll build that.

LAURA: Oh, I thought it was like a grappling–

TALIESIN: It's a trip arrow.

LAURA: Oh, that's cool, okay.

MARISHA: A 30-foot radius.

TALIESIN: I'll make you a grappling– I didn't follow that though. I'll make you a grappling arrow.

LAURA: I have a grappling hook. Yeah, we should grapple out.

MATT: 30-foot radius, okay, so you could just–

MARISHA: Just, hug me.

MATT: – barely get Tiberius in there if you–

MARISHA: Stay close.

TRAVIS: You can go on my back.

MATT: On the platform, so yeah.

ASHLEY: Okay, I'm gonna jump on Grog's back.

TRAVIS: Yeah, and I pick up Scanlan under my arm.

LAURA: We have a regular grappling hook, we'll just get up out of the–

TALIESIN: We have a flying carpet.

ASHLEY: And hold onto some straps.

MATT: All right, so Scanlan– Both gnomes get grabbed by Keyleth as–

ORION: And we're all on the carpet?

LIAM: The carpet's away, but this guy is flying?

ORION: Yes.

LIAM: Flying Grog.

TRAVIS: I am? I thought we were all– Okay.

LIAM: No, you can't go on the carpet. You're too heavy.

LAURA: What are we doing?

LIAM: We're going up. Straight up.

LAURA: Up and out. Can we stealth, while we do it?

MATT: So, you guys, right now, as you're carrying the two gnomes, all of you except for Grog are on the carpet, correct?

TRAVIS: Yep, I'm flying.

MATT: You're flying. Okay, so how many spells do you have left on that? One left? All right.

LAURA: Where's Trinket?

TALIESIN: Trinket's back on the other side.

MATT: Trinket's back on the other side. Trinket didn't come with you to the battle, because there was nobody to get Trinket across.

LAURA: Oh, he's just on the other side by himself, all lonely?

MATT: Yeah, I know.

LIAM: He's in goblin town.

MATT: Eh, you weren't here.

(all laugh)

MATT: You weren't here to protect your bear.

LAURA: That's so terrible.

ASHLEY: He's safe over there?

MATT: Hopefully.

ASHLEY: Oh Trinket!

TRAVIS: He's been raging.

MATT: Everyone, make a stealth check. With a plus ten additional modifier thanks to Keyleth's spell.

TRAVIS: Oh, awesome. That helped.

ORION: 20.

ASHLEY: Oh, 20!

MARISHA: 18.

TRAVIS: Natural? Oh.

LAURA: Nice. Ooh, natural 20!

TALIESIN: 19.

TRAVIS: 19.

ASHLEY: 20.

LAURA and TRAVIS: Natural 20.

LAURA: 31 for me.

LIAM: 29.

MATT: All right, so you all take off. As you do, you can see now, probably close to 30 or 40 duergar have now begun rushing towards the barracks in the center of that main open area where that wooden platform was, where Scanlan originally saw a mind flayer. As you rush up, you hear (speaks Undercommon). You hear it as Undercommon, screaming, “There! Above, look!”

LAURA: Oh, they saw us.

ASHLEY: Maybe you should scream, like, no, they went the other way!

LIAM: Just keep going up, up, up.

MATT: A stream of javelins comes firing up in your direction.

LAURA: How did they see us? I thought we were stealthed.

ORION: I see where it's coming and I shoot a Fireball.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: That's good, that's good.

MARISHA: Wait, what are you doing?

MATT: Okay, so there's a volley of javelins and a Fireball streaking past. You'll be able to get ten of them in that Fireball blast, go ahead and roll for damage on that. However, for those that rolled less than 20 on stealth, each of you are getting three javelins each to you. So that's you two, and Grog. What'd you roll again?

MARISHA: Less than 20.

ORION: 22.

MATT: Okay, yeah. So you three. So three javelins against you, miss you entirely. Percy. Actually, one more against you, Keyleth. That one does hit. You take 14 points of piercing damage as the javelin just gleans off the side of your giant eagle torso.

MARISHA: (eagle noises)

MATT: Percy, that's a 21, an 18, and a 20. So you take three javelins. 24 points of piercing damage.

TALIESIN: 24 points?

MATT: Yeah, 24 points total, as three javelins– Two strike you off the shoulders and one actually embeds itself partway into your waist and you have to pull it out, and probably dug a good six, seven inches in.

ASHLEY: What are you at?

TALIESIN: I'm at 15.

ASHLEY: 15?

ORION: By the way, 41 points of fire damage.

TALIESIN: I was already really low.

TRAVIS: Take me instead.

LAURA: We haven't healed him yet.

ASHLEY: Wait, we healed the other game. Even with that?

TALIESIN: Oh, did I fully heal?

MATT: All right, the three that are going towards Grog–

TRAVIS: Yeah, come on.

MATT: That– Natural 20. A 17, what's your AC?

ASHLEY: No, it was like 24.

TRAVIS: 18.

ASHLEY: 24 points.

MATT: That one misses, and the last one– Yeah, two natural 20s.

TALIESIN: Yeah.

ASHLEY: That was 24.

MATT: Not even joking.

LIAM: Double crits, oh.

MATT: All right, so–

LAURA: Two crits against you?

LIAM: Good thing you got a thousand hit points.

TRAVIS: (high-pitched) Oh no.

LIAM: That's the point of a meat tank.

MATT: You take a total of 36 points of piercing damage, Grog.

ASHLEY: And he still has more hitpoints than we do.

MATT: Yeah, probably.

MARISHA: Ouchies.

MATT: Oh, barbarian.

LIAM: If Scanlan were here, he'd moon and blind all.

LAURA: He is here, technically.

MATT: He is here, Scanlan's holding on tight as–

LIAM: He's here, he's watching.

TALIESIN: Scanlan's peeing, peeing down.

MATT: However, as the javelins strike all you guys, moments later there's a gargantuan explosion, and there's a flash of reddish light from below. A giant fiery blooming explosion bursts into the center of that area. You can see duergar thrown left and right. You manage to take out about 12 of them in that one blast.

ORION: Yes!

LAURA: Nice!

LIAM: Yeah, home slice.

MATT: You guys continue, cresting over the top. You can now see more and more are starting to gather, the bells are going off, the horns are blowing hard. You can see a bunch of them are now running over to what looks like some of this siege equipment they had constructed–

MARISHA and LAURA: Oh.

MATT: Which includes a few large ballistae.

LIAM: I think we should friggin' dive bomb towards the far tunnel past this war camp.

LAURA: No, but Trinket!

LIAM: Is fine, he's hiding out. They don't know he's here.

TRAVIS: Leave him.

TALIESIN: He'll be fine.

ORION: I'm not concerned with the bear right now!

LIAM: We're going to dive. Yes, dive bomb, dive bomb!

TALIESIN: The bear can take care of himself.

LIAM: I take hold of the front of the carpet and steer it up and over, along the roof and then down towards the tunnel. I'm steering the carpet.

MATT: Okay. You guys are coming down. You basically shot up, curved around–

LAURA: We shouldn't go down.

MATT: And you're going backwards towards the barracks. As you do, another volley of–

LAURA: We got to free those dwarves, y'all.

MATT: Another volley comes to the guys who were under-stealthed.

LIAM: We don't have to. That seems complicated.

ORION: Who's not stealthed?

MATT: However, there is one attack less each because of the duergar that you had taken out. So, against Keyleth, one hits. You take 12 points of piercing damage.

MARISHA: I am no longer an eagle.

TALIESIN: Oh my God.

TRAVIS: Oh shit, really?

MATT: All right, a two and a one versus Percy.

MARISHA: Yeah.

TRAVIS: Are you paying attention?

ORION: Wait, what?

TRAVIS: She's not an eagle anymore.

MATT: All right, so.

LAURA: Keyleth isn't a–

MARISHA: I hit zero hit points as an eagle.

ASHLEY: Wait, what are you again?

LAURA: What happened?

LIAM: She's not an eagle and she's falling with the gnomes.

MATT: Keyleth's form shifts back into that of Keyleth. You guys are about 80 feet up.

MARISHA: Help!

LAURA: Okay, okay!

ASHLEY: Can I–

MATT: At which point, both Scanlan and Pike go into a free fall along with Keyleth.

ASHLEY: Wait, can I–

LAURA: No, no, she was on Grog, she was–

ORION: Are we under them? Are we under them?

LIAM: I don't know, are we?

ASHLEY: No, I was on her.

MATT: No, you guys are about parallel. You guys were moving together.

LIAM: Parallel?

ORION: Go under them!

LAURA: Yeah, we dive under them.

LIAM: Dive, dive, dive, dive!

ORION: I cast Glacial Blast and I create a bridge that scoops them up, right under them. As we dive right under them.

LIAM: Party trick.

MATT: Okay, you guys are out in the middle of the open cavern. There's no place to connect the bridge, so you're essentially creating a giant ice–

LIAM and LAURA: Chunk.

MATT: Chunk right beneath them. Which is also now in freefall.

ORION: Huh? No!

MATT: Yes.

LIAM: Even wizards make mistakes.

ORION: Damn it!

MATT: So as you guys try and swoop underneath as they're plummeting– You're riding this, go ahead and make an acrobatics check.

LIAM: Okay.

ORION: No, I didn't think of that.

MARISHA: I don't know what to do.

LAURA: Can we try to catch– can we try to– what do I have?

ASHLEY: Wait, can I–

TRAVIS: Are we over the war camp, or are we over the–

LIAM: 25.

LAURA: Over the war camp.

MATT: All right, so you swoop underneath. A sudden motion, as you're trying to cast. Go ahead and roll a concentration check on this.

MARISHA: Oh, come on, Tiberius.

TALIESIN: Oh boy.

MARISHA: Oh, save my life, again, Tiberius.

ORION: Oh no.

LAURA: Can I try to–

MARISHA: Oh shit.

LIAM: I let go of the front of the carpet, I stick a–

ASHLEY: Wait, wait, wait, wait, can I cast War God's Blessing to give him a plus ten?

MATT: Unfortunately, you're falling.

ASHLEY: Fuck.

MATT: You're like (worried noise), you're just plummeting through the air like a rock because you're in full plate armor.

LAURA: Can I use the rope of endless twine and try to lasso one of them? 'Cause I'm really a good shot.

ASHLEY: How far are we falling?

MATT: You have to pull it out of the bag of holding and then turn into a lasso, that's gonna take you a full minute, so you don't have time.

LIAM: I have a rope. I let go of the front of the carpet, I put one end of the rope in my sister's hand, and I jump off towards Pike, holding it around in one hand as I go–

LAURA: Oh god.

TALIESIN: I grapple onto her to hold her down.

ASHLEY: No! No, no, no, I have so much armor.

LAURA: Okay, then you should–

MATT: All right guys, so here's what happens. In the time this has transpired, you've rushed underneath with the magic carpet, all of you barely managed to hold on, as both Pike and Scanlan and Keyleth all slam into the top of the–

LAURA: Oh okay, except you're dangling off of it now by a rope.

MATT: You lost your concentration, so Glacial Blast didn't go off, thankfully. That would've been really bad.

MARISHA: Wait, wait, we slam into the top of what?

TALIESIN: Us.

MATT: You guys slam onto the top of the rest of the group, in there.

LAURA: That's too many people on the carpet.

MATT: Because you lost your concentration, your flight spell also dissipates. Grog is now plummeting.

LAURA: Oh no!

TRAVIS: Yay!

ALL: (worried noises)

LAURA: We're gonna die!

MATT: The carpet now has too much weight and is currently giving out.

LIAM: #savecriticalrole.

ORION: Get me close to him. I cast Featherfall on you.

MATT: It's slowing your fall, but you guys are– you're coming down at a very, very fast pace at an angle over the barracks towards the back end of the war camp.

LAURA: Oh shit.

MARISHA: Can I cast Wind Wall right underneath of the carpet to kind of like airbend us up?

MATT: You can attempt to. Grog–

TRAVIS: I begin to fart to slow the fall.

ORION: Who needs Featherfall? I can do it in a bunch!

MARISHA: Ahh!

MATT: Everybody, at this point–

LIAM: But wait, Dungeon Master?

MATT: Yes.

LIAM: Re-explain what's happening. So the carpet is falling, not as fast as it would, but–

MATT: Essentially, you guys are flying beside each other, the three that were falling, you guys swooped underneath and caught them, however it's too much weight to bear, the carpet's now–

LIAM: How high are we at this second?

MATT: At this second, you're about 60-70 feet up.

MARISHA: Ohh.

LIAM: And the closest building, the highest building under us is how tall?

MARISHA: Oh, Jesus.

MATT: It's about 15 feet tall.

LIAM: Ohh.

MATT: Grog, however, goes into a full plummet. You guys have just caught the rest of them, you've all caught them, you're crashing down.

MARISHA: And did the Wind Wall thing work?

MATT: Go ahead and roll a concentration.

LAURA: Everybody jump up in the air!

MATT: Your constitution modifier.

MARISHA: Fucking shit. Not good. Seven.

MATT: The spell fizzles.

LIAM: Unpause. How far are we from the tunnel that we were talking about?

MATT: From what you can see here, you're probably about 50 to 60 feet.

LAURA: We're right over the camp, aren't we?

MATT: You're towards the back of it, thankfully, the barracks are towards the back of it, so maybe about 50 to 60 feet from the full tunnel.

ORION: Before where the drop is, and that's where that bottom tunnel is down there?

MATT: Yep.

ORION: Okay.

MATT: You guys go crashing at an angle.

TALIESIN: I'm going to brace to jump. I'm bracing to roll.

LAURA: Yeah, we're all like bracing.

MARISHA: Three-point landing!

LIAM: I'm grabbing for Pike and going like this.

LAURA: I have Scanlan!

MARISHA: What's Grog doing?

ORION: Where's Grog at?

LAURA: He's falling.

LIAM: Grog's gone. Grog's down.

MATT: Grog is completely separate from you. He was flying, and lost concentration of his spell. Grog's like a stone.

LAURA: No, Grog!

ORION: Can I leap towards him?

TALIESIN: Off what?

MARISHA: And do what?

MATT: Off of the carpet–

ORION: Off of the carpet! Yes!

LIAM: Do what?

LAURA: You leap off of the carpet?

MATT: Go ahead and make an acrobatics check. With a disadvantage, because you are jumping off of a currently flimsy flying carpet to try and catch up to him.

LAURA: Oh no.

ORION: Right now, while I'm doing this, I'm going to cast Featherfall on myself.

TRAVIS: Wait, before, you gotta get to me first, because it will slow you too much.

ORION: Oh. It would, wouldn't it? I thought it was only when going down.

TRAVIS: Gotta get to me first, motherfucker.

MATT: Go for it.

ORION: Whoa. Okay.

MATT: So what's your acrobatics check? The lower of the two.

LIAM: You fall a lot.

TRAVIS: Yeah. Big things go down.

ORION: 15 and 13.

MATT: Okay. You manage to fumble out of the carpet, however, you are now just end-over-end falling now off of the side of the carpet on your own.

LIAM: This is tense.

LAURA: This is tense.

MATT: You're having a hard time even seeing Grog now. The world's just spinning and spinning and spinning.

LAURA: Oh God.

TRAVIS: It's like Gravity.

MATT: You can attempt–

ORION: Now I'm going to cast Featherfall.

MATT: Go ahead, cast and roll concentration check. What did you roll?

MARISHA: He rolled a 19. Which is good.

MATT: Okay. Featherfall gets to you just in time. Your descent slows. In that time, Grog has impacted.

MARISHA: Fuck!

LAURA: Oh no, Grog!

LIAM: We're gonna hit, we're gonna hit. I'm shielding the healer.

LAURA: I'm shielding Scanlan.

MATT: So you all brace for impact. The actual carpet's careening out of control. You can see there's just barely the top of a building you might be able to try and skim.

LAURA: Can we jump onto the top of the building?

MATT: This is going to be up to the one who's been steering this whole time. Go ahead and make an intelligence check.

LAURA: Intelligence!

LIAM: Intelligence?

MATT: Yes.

ASHLEY: Can I assist?

MATT: No.

TRAVIS: Thank God it's not me.

MARISHA: Can we do nothing and–

LIAM: Good, good, good, good. 24.

MATT: 24?

LIAM: Yeah, so I'm pretty smart.

MATT: You just managed to skim the edge, which lessens your impact slightly, however, it does send you all into a full end-over-end topple.

LIAM: Still holding a gnome!

MATT: Everyone. Everyone. Make an acrobatics check.

LAURA: Oh, god. Which one to roll, which one to roll.

MARISHA: Oh, no. What's going on with Grog?

LIAM: I guess that's what we'll find out afterwards.

MATT: Grog's impacted. He was falling faster than you guys were, he's six hundred pounds going into straight freefall. You guys had a little bit of a fall break.

MARISHA: Ah, this is going terribly! I'm failing!

ORION: Do I have to do one also?

MATT: Everyone. Oh, except for you, because you're floating.

LIAM: Do the halflings– Shit! Do the gnomes get an advantage since the half-elves are protecting them?

LAURA: Depending on how we roll?

MATT: It's based on how you guys roll, because you're the ones who are holding onto them.

LIAM: Oh, okay.

LAURA: Welp, Scanlan. I'm sorry to let you know–

TALIESIN: No.

LIAM: Oh no!

MATT: So you got Pike?

LIAM: Yeah, I got Pike.

MATT: What'd you roll?

LIAM: 18.

MATT: Natural one.

ASHLEY: 13.

TRAVIS: 18.

TALIESIN: 23.

MARISHA: Four.

MATT: Okay, so half-damage for you.

LAURA: But I have a plus nine acrobatics! Plus nine acrobatics!

LIAM: Doesn't matter.

LAURA: Doesn't matter on a natural crit fail.

TALIESIN: Still gonna knock me out.

MATT: Roll some fall damage here.

LAURA: I'm sorry, Scanlan!

LIAM: It's all right, I got the healer, I got the healer.

MARISHA: It's not gonna be good.

TRAVIS: You're gonna be like an ACME cartoon and just leave a (pff)

LAURA and LIAM: (pff)

MATT: 18 points of damage.

TALIESIN: I'm out.

MARISHA: You're out again?

LAURA: You're unconscious again?

TALIESIN: Yeah.

MATT: He didn't have a lot of hit points left.

LAURA: Oh no, we're all dead!

MARISHA: This the second time Grog's almost fallen to his death.

MATT: 18 points of damage to you. The rest of you all take 36 points of fall damage, except for Grog.

LIAM: Everybody, everybody?

LAURA: Everybody? As a group, like we all failed as a group?

MATT: Well, no, no, sorry. You succeeded, you rolled a–

LIAM: 18.

MATT: 18, so you would also take half-damage, so you would take 18 as well.

ASHLEY: I take–

MATT: You take half that as well, thanks to his roll as well.

TRAVIS: I rolled an 18.

ASHLEY: Everybody in this club getting hit points.

MATT: Right, you were in full plummet, you can reduce the damage slightly.

TRAVIS: Well, I was very graceful on the way down.

MATT: Yeah, you take 45 points of damage from the impact, Grog.

MARISHA: 45?

MATT: 45 points of damage.

MARISHA: Oh.

LIAM: It was halved, so eight.

MATT: And leave a small crater from the impact.

TRAVIS: Thank you.

MARISHA: You know what, that could've been worse.

LAURA: And I take 35?

MATT: You and Scanlan both take 36, which puts Scanlan into a negative as well, because he wasn't– he was not at–

LAURA: No, no! He was fully healed.

TRAVIS: Nope.

MATT: No, he wasn't.

LAURA: (Softly) Fuck.

LIAM: No, sorry, no.

MATT: So, you all tumble end over end, come to rest.

MARISHA: We just crash-landed in a war camp.

MATT: Yeah. On the far end of it, thankfully.

MARISHA: Oh boy.

MATT: You guys can hear the bells and the horns going in the distance. It looks like all the rest of the folks that were stationed here moved towards the center. You managed to arc over them, but they're going to be here shortly.

TRAVIS: Are we near their big war machines?

MATT: No, the ballistae are on the opposite–

ORION: So we can see the ledge and that cavern where we were, where we found the–

MATT: Well, the ledge is back in the other direction. You guys are going towards the tunnel on the opposite side.

LIAM: Vax is pulling up Pike onto her feet and dragging her towards Scanlan, 'cause I know how fucked up he was from the last battle.

ASHLEY: Where's Scanlan? How close–

MATT: Okay, you guys– and you, you're kinda getting up on your knees, coughing–

MARISHA: How, how–

ASHLEY: Percy's out, let's go–

LIAM: But so is Scanlan.

MATT: Percy's just face-down in the ground, scrapes across the side of his face.

ASHLEY: Scanlan's out, too? Fuck.

LIAM: Scanlan's out, too, right?

MATT: Scanlan's also out.

TRAVIS: How about– I'll give him a level three potion and you go heal Scanlan.

LAURA: No, you, here, you take care of him, I'm right next to Scanlan,

MATT: You guys are roughly about ten feet from each other from the impact, just, you were scattered, and then you kind of regrouped.

MARISHA: Okay. Can we see people running towards us?

MATT: Not yet, but you assume it's only a short period of time.

ORION: Yeah, yeah, we have some time left–

MARISHA: We don't, I don't know.

MATT: Grog, what you at?

TRAVIS: 39.

MATT: Okay.

TRAVIS: She's doing a Mass Healing–

ASHLEY: A Mass Healing Word.

MATT: Okay. You barely get yourself out of the crater. That's gonna suck tomorrow!

MARISHA: Mass Healing Word?

LIAM: You take Scanlan, I'll take Percy.

LAURA: Okay! I'm gonna–

LIAM: Healing potions out.

MATT: As this is happening, Percy, go ahead and make a death saving throw.

LAURA: Oh!

TRAVIS: A death saving throw?

LIAM: Sorry, here's three–

TALIESIN: Is that– Is that just–

MATT: What did you roll?

TALIESIN: A nine.

MATT: That's a fail, so mark off one fail on your death saving throw on your sheet.

LAURA: (gasps)

ASHLEY and LAURA: No no no no!

TRAVIS: Oh shit!

LIAM: Sorry I'm late, Percy.

MATT: Scanlan does make his.

LIAM: He's all right, he's all right, he's all right. I've got a healing potion and I'm pouring it–

ASHLEY: But I'm doing–

LIAM: I'm pinching Percy's nose and pouring it in his mouth.

LAURA: And I'm pouring some down Scanlan's throat.

MATT: Okay, all right. So both you guys pour healing potions. That is– those are the normal ones? The common? The regular healing?

LIAM: I think so.

LAURA: Yeah?

MATT: 2d4 plus two. Go ahead and roll that.

LIAM: (whispers) 2d4 plus two.

TRAVIS: I'm taking a level two potion, myself. Just–

TALIESIN: 2d4 plus two?

MATT: Okay, go for it.

LIAM: Eight. Eight for Percy.

MATT: That's four–

TALIESIN: Oh! So I'm at plus eight now?

MATT and LIAM: Yes.

LIAM: You're up.

MATT: Scanlan also comes to consciousness.

LAURA: 2d4? That's pathetic.

MATT: That's the cheapest one you've got. 2d4 plus two.

LIAM: Let's get the fuck out of here and they can–

LAURA: Okay, fine.

TALIESIN: She was gonna do a Mass Healing–

MARISHA: Yeah, what's your Mass Healing Word?

ORION: I'd like to know– on the way down, I was doing a little chant and I was expending my sorcery points to do Flexible Casting, so I regain a slot spell on my third-level spells.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: As we're getting up, can I see– Is the camp nearby, where the prisoners are? Is that anywhere near us?

MATT: No, that's towards the center of the camp.

LIAM: We gotta keep moving. I pull out another corked potion and slap it into Percy's hand.

MARISHA: Yeah, we gotta go.

LIAM: And then grab him by the wrist and just start walking.

TALIESIN: I'm up.

MARISHA: Here, wait. Save the potion, I cast Healing Word on Percy.

ASHLEY: Hold on, I'm gonna do a Mass Cure Wounds.

LAURA: Mass Cure Wounds?

MATT: All right. So as you guys are running towards the back, towards the main tunnel, which you can now see, it's roughly a 40- by 30-foot tunnel. You go running through the buildings. You see a few duergar kinda poke out from the buildings.

LAURA: Can we stealth while we're doing this, or are we too, like, injured?

ORION: No, this is–

MATT: No, you guys are just bolting at this point. You're not even concentrating on stealth right now.

LAURA: Bolting it, right.

TALIESIN: This is, this is–

MATT: Plus, with the group– Basically, a few of you would stealth and the rest of you would be left in the dust, so you're just kind of all pushing for speed at this point.

LAURA: Okay.

ORION: Yeah.

MATT: You all manage to push towards the back of the entire war camp, into this tunnel. Hearing behind you the distant echoing shouts of approximately 30-plus duergar heading in your direction. You hear a few other ballista bolts hitting the wall above you of the stone.

ORION: Are we all in the tunnel?

MATT: You guys have now pushed into the tunnel.

ORION: I wait for everybody to pass and I cast all my Grand Columns.

MATT: Okay, how many can you–

ORION: Three.

MATT: Three per spell? And how many spell levels do you have currently?

ORION: That's it, that's what I did the SP for, so that I could cast this right now.

MATT: Right. So you have one.

ORION: I have none in my column.

MATT: Right. How many spell castings did you have left? Two?

ORION: No, I had one.

ASHLEY: (whispers) 24.

TALIESIN: 24?

LAURA: 24 mass?

ASHLEY: 24 mass cure.

MATT: One left. So you get three columns. It's 30 feet wide.

LAURA: Oh, she just healed everybody for 24 points.

ORION: (whispers) Oh, it's 30–

MARISHA: Oh, dope.

MATT: Okay, everyone heals for 24 points. Add that up.

LIAM: Oh, I feel good!

LAURA: I feel pretty good now.

TRAVIS: Dude! Kick that shit.

LAURA: What what!

ORION: It's not enough, is it?

MATT: No.

ASHLEY: (sighs) Okay. Including myself?

LIAM and TRAVIS: Yes.

ORION: Are the caves stone? Like the cave–

MATT: The walls are stone.

TRAVIS: Ugh, that's huge.

LAURA: Oh my god, it's major.

ORION: Can I like, do it from the side? Can I attempt to?

MATT: Pillars go straight up, unfortunately. It's the nature of the spell's creation.

MARISHA: Well wait, I can do what you're trying to do.

ORION: Oh! Oh yeah!

MARISHA: I do Wall Of Stone.

ORION: There you go!

MATT: Okay! So as you're trying to figure this out, Keyleth steps over–

MARISHA: I'm like, oh, is this, oh–

ORION: It's– Oh!

MARISHA: Sorry! You should've just– I would've– they're not very–

ORION: They're columns.

MARISHA: Yeah.

ORION: You're good. The wall's good.

MARISHA: Right.

ORION: Good.

LAURA: Are we running? I don't know what you guys are doing. What's happening right now?

MATT: As you guys are doing this and rushing in, you're realizing there's one member of your party that you haven't had a lot of time with–

LAURA and LIAM: Clarota!

MATT: – that you didn't think about until this moment.

LIAM: Clarota, yeah. Clarota.

MARISHA: Oh, yeah!

MATT: You now see, kind of, like, floating, via levitation ability, about 30 feet away, slowly descending towards you, as you're putting up the wall of stone–

ORION: Oh! Wait! Hold on!

TRAVIS: Come on Squidworth, over here!

MATT: Two bolts go firing towards him; one whooshes overhead, a second one–

MARISHA: Clarota!

MATT: (impact sound) – through his back, out the front of his chest–

LAURA: No!

MATT: – off the shoulder.

ORION: Come on! We need to save him!

LIAM: He's gotta have more than ten hit points.

ORION: Recess the wall, recess the wall!

MARISHA: Wait!

MATT: You can see now– and the bolt itself is about four feet long, made of this long, jagged, pointed arrow tip.

LAURA: Oh, man.

MATT: Clarota begins to falter, and begins to hover towards you, almost, like, trying to swim through the air in your direction.

LAURA: Can we run out, try to grab him?

ASHLEY: Can I grab him, hang on to him?

ORION: Oh!

MATT: He's about 20 feet from you now, you can try and reach out and put your hands towards him–

ORION: Boom!

LAURA: Yeah, yeah, yeah.

TRAVIS: I take off and run to him.

ORION: Now I cast Glacial Blast, right under him, like a slide, right towards us– and catch him.

MATT: Okay. So as you guys are running towards him, instead, this giant crystalline form of ice just–

LAURA: Oh, all right.

MATT: – crackles up into what looks like some sort of strange, winter festival slide that would be made for children in the center of town. Clarota–

ASHLEY: Awesome.

MATT: – as it descends, two more bolts come towards him. Both (whoosh, whoosh). At this distance, in the darkness of the cavern, it's kind of hard for them to get a bead on him. Both just pass overhead. With eyes kind of lolling, Clarota comes down and hits the edge of the slide, and almost loses consciousness at that moment, sliding through the ice. You guys manage to capture, grappling his arms, lift him to his feet–

MARISHA: And now, Wall Of Stone.

MATT: You all make it into the tunnel, Keyleth turns around, raising her hands, the actual blackened stonework of this tunnel shakes for a second, and then a giant, thick wall of natural rock closes off the entire tunnel behind you.

ORION: Nice.

LAURA: I love you, Trinket!

LIAM: Completely seals it?

MARISHA: Oh, gosh.

MATT: Completely seals it. You guys are now in complete darkness.

ORION: Ooh! Light!

MATT: As the light hits, you can hear, just on the other side of the surface of the stone wall, javelins, other things are being shot at the stone wall–

LAURA: Yeah!

MATT: – but it's keeping it at bay. You guys are now at the wall, and behind you the tunnel continues into a passage you haven't seen yet.

TRAVIS: Whatever we do from here, I sprinkle dust of tracelessness behind us the whole time like a fucking flower girl.

(all laugh)

LIAM: They could have magic in their possession, they could use magic as well, so let's move.

LAURA: Yeah, they could get through it.

ORION: Yes.

TALIESIN: Will a healing potion work on Clarota?

ASHLEY: So, Clarota's with us?

LAURA: Clarota's with us.

ASHLEY: Can I go over to Clarota and try to heal him?

LAURA: Don't get too close, he might just suck in your brain.

MATT: You can certainly try.

TALIESIN: I've got a potion, so–

MARISHA: Grog?

ASHLEY: Should we give him a potion?

TRAVIS: What?

MARISHA: Do you have any ale?

TRAVIS: Yeah, I do have a cask, actually.

MARISHA: I think I need a drink.

TRAVIS: Right. I'll–

TALIESIN: What's a level two potion do?

TRAVIS: There you are.

MATT: A level two potion would be 4d4 plus four.

TRAVIS: I go and hold his shoulders–

MARISHA: I really need a drink.

TRAVIS: – whilst she tries to heal him, just in case he gets all sucky on her.

ASHLEY: I think he's gonna give him a potion.

TRAVIS: Oh.

TALIESIN: I am.

TRAVIS: That's much less–

LAURA: No!

LIAM: Felicia Day, that's not nice!

TRAVIS: Hey!

TALIESIN: 17 points of healing.

MATT: Okay. 17 points to Clarota.

ASHLEY: What'd she say?

MATT: Which– administering a potion to a mind flayer is an experience that very few in this world have probably ever, or ever will, experience. As you kind of reach over, grab his shoulder, you look for where to put it, and the tendrils kind of, like, flail about, but begin to– they, as he notices what you're doing, kind of relax and open up, and you can now see the circular, lamprey-like, toothy maw of the mind flayer. It's a very disturbing, disgusting image, with this jagged, yellow teeth, in a circular form. You pop the cork, and just pour it in. As you do, you see the wounds across Clarota's form begin to seal. The arrow is still stuck in its torso.

LAURA: Can we try to pull it out?

ASHLEY: Try to break off the part–

MATT: You can certainly try.

TRAVIS: I got it (snap)!

MATT: Go ahead and make a– this would be a medicine check.

LAURA: Do you wanna do that, Grog?

TRAVIS: I'll do the breaking part.

MATT: It's iron. It's solid iron.

ASHLEY: My medicine's a four.

LAURA: Oh.

MATT: Breaking it off is not gonna work.

ASHLEY: What's your medicine?

TRAVIS: So? Zero.

MATT: You have to pull it from the wound.

ASHLEY: Okay. I'll try.

TALIESIN: Who has a medicine?

LAURA: So what are you–

ASHLEY: A four.

LAURA: Okay. All right.

ASHLEY: What does everybody have?

MATT: Go for it.

LAURA: Do it!

ASHLEY: Roll this guy? Okay. Nine?

MATT: A nine.

LAURA: (laughs) Oh no.

ASHLEY: Sorry!

MATT: So. You take your moment, you view up where the puncture wound is, with a little bit of Grog's help, you both grab the edge, and you're like, 'On three. One, two, three, pull!' You pull through the wound, not against the arrow–

TRAVIS: Right.

MATT: – 'cause that would just tear everything out in the process, but nevertheless, in doing so, Clarota does take an additional eight points of damage.

ASHLEY: I'm sorry.

MATT: But, the wound is now no longer a giant–

LAURA: Able to be healed.

MATT: – it's now able to be healed completely, so. Clarota takes a moment and kind of grasps the wound.

LAURA: I hand him a little healing potion, and say, sorry.

MATT: Shatters the glass. At which point, you now hear (impact sounds) against the stone wall.

LAURA: We should move!

ASHLEY: Time to go!

LIAM: Let's keep moving, yes? Yes.

TRAVIS: I pick up Clarota. Yeah, why not.

LAURA: Yeah, all right.

TRAVIS: I pick up Clarota and we start running balls.

LAURA: Is he good enough to walk or is he–

MATT: He's good enough to walk with you guys. Well–

TRAVIS: Well, how about I put one arm under his face and help him.

MATT: So you're helping him.

LIAM: No, that's– hold on a second. I take out the flying carpet–

LAURA: We still have the flying carpet?

LIAM: Sure we do!

MATT: Yeah.

LIAM: Here, sit on this, Clarota.

LAURA: If you need it.

LIAM: That'd be easier, yes.

MATT: Clarota gets up on the carpet and– “Thank you.” The carpet kind of drifts alongside you guys. You guys are pushing backwards towards the cavern. The tunnel kind of begins to pinch a little bit. It gets to about a 15-foot width before it opens up again. You're about a hundred feet back. You can now see it opening into a– what looks like an extension of the war camp.

(all groan)

LAURA: We should've gone down! What were we thinking?

MATT: Go ahead and make a perception check.

LIAM: That guy was lying.

LAURA: Well, he said go down. We didn't go down.

LIAM: 21 for me.

LAURA: 13 for me. I like how my passive perception is way higher than any rolls that I ever do.

MATT: I do keep that– I keep tabs on that.

TALIESIN: 22.

MARISHA: Are we all doing perception rolls?

MATT: For the most part, we've got a few rolls, and it worked fine. Looking inside though, this camp looks like it's been abandoned.

LAURA: Oh, good!

MATT: It looks like it was built, and then the expansion into the war camp you just escaped from seemed to be the next step. Like it's slowly advancing and this section of it has been in disuse. As you push in towards the center of the camp you can see there's older campfires, lots of the tents have like partially collapsed. Dust has gathered.

LIAM: I'm keeping my eyes peeled for useful shit.

MATT: Okay. Looking around as well, you see all the equipment. Any pieces that would be of interest have either been taken– either destroyed and are broken or have probably been moved into the war camp. You glance through a couple of the tents. Looking about, it's definitely been abandoned. It no longer serves a purpose and anything of use has been stripped and taken. This cavern is maybe about 60 feet up or so. It's a little domed section, and you can now see there are two exit tunnels to this section. One that is kind of straight ahead, a little bit to the left. And one that veers off to the direct left of you. So if you're looking straight from the direction you came, there is one right ahead of you, a little bit to the left and one that goes quickly to the left.

LAURA: Should we take the left one?

TRAVIS: Which one's the left one?

MARISHA: He mentioned the left.

LAURA: Yeah, so maybe we should stay left.

MATT: Yeah, do that.

LIAM: Clarota, do you know anything about these passages?

LAURA: Do you remember anything?

MARISHA: Wait, why did he say that? Why did you say that?

MATT: 'Cause they're both kind of left. It's a joke. Clarota takes a moment and kind of looks at you, kind of– his breath. “I've not been this far up these tunnels. It's too dangerous this close to the war camp. I would've been killed in a second.”

LAURA: What about the general's memory? Anything there?

MATT: He kind of closes his eyes for a second. “One of these leads below, one of them leads to the surface. I can't recall which.”

LAURA: Can we go up and–

TRAVIS: Let's split up!

LAURA: No, can we go next to the one on the far left and see if I sense any like wind coming down, is there–

MATT: Going to the one on the far left, as you're stepping you hear a (muffled impact noise)–

LAURA: Oh, well, good.

MATT: – against the distant stone wall that you put up.

TRAVIS: I think we get to pick one here.

MARISHA: Are there any–

ASHLEY: He did say go left.

MATT: As you head to the tunnel, you don't sense any sort of temperature change, but it does seem to steady off into a decline that curves to the left.

LAURA: We should do that.

TALIESIN: Sounds good.

MARISHA: Do you mean, are there like– is there any wildlife, any bats, any type of animals, anything like that?

MATT: We shall say, a general sense of this area, you look and you can see, in this area, unlike the previous sections, there are small clusters of bats on the ceiling.

MARISHA: Okay, I'm going to–

MATT: As apparently they have an exit of some kind to the surface.

MARISHA: I'm going to go ahead and cast Beast Sense on one of the bats.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: And I'm going to channel myself through the bat and I'm going to make him fly down the far left tunnel.

MATT: Okay. So as you guys are walking over there, one of the bats–

ASHLEY: Good call.

MATT: – heads down into the tunnel, continues into the darkness.

MARISHA: Can I just see–

MATT: From the echolocation, which is a very strange sensation, you haven't really done this before for a bat and it's a very weird experience.

MARISHA: Wow, guys, this is really trippy.

TALIESIN: We just hear (bat sounds).

MATT: It continues about a steady 40-degree decline that goes further and further down.

LAURA: Keep going down. Down, down, down.

MATT: Eventually, you get to a point where the bat is out of your sphere of influence and you lose your connection to the bat.

LAURA: Keep going down?

MARISHA: Well, I didn't really see much, but definitely there is a pretty steep incline. We could try it again and go down the other one.

LIAM: This is a coin flip.

LAURA: I think we keep going down. Just stick with it.

ORION: Hold on! Incline means up.

LAURA: Oh.

MATT: No, it's a decline.

MARISHA: Decline.

ORION: Decline means down.

LAURA: Well, then let's go with the decline. Yes?

TALIESIN: Yes.

LAURA: Let's do it!

TALIESIN: We go. With haste.

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: All righty.

TRAVIS: With haste!

LAURA: With stealth! With Dust of Tracelessness behind us.

TRAVIS: Hey, flower girl!

LAURA: Flower girl!

ORION: Actually, there's two tunnels, right?

MATT: There are two tunnels, yes.

ORION: And one's smaller than the other?

MATT: Correct.

ORION: Hm.

MATT: Yes?

TALIESIN: There's no right answer here. It's just–

ORION: I know.

TALIESIN: Yeah.

ORION: How big is the– how wide is the smaller one that we're going through?

MATT: There's one, the one on the far end, the one that does not appear to be a decline, seems to be the widest of the two.

TRAVIS: I pull out a torch. Will you light my torch?

ORION: Yeah.

TRAVIS: Nice.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Are we going to the left?

LAURA: Yeah.

TRAVIS: I take off running to the left.

LAURA: Oh, god. Grog!

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: Running, running?

TRAVIS: Running!

LIAM: Really running?

TRAVIS: Running to the left.

ORION: Oh man, oh no!

MATT: Grog goes charging into the darkened tunnel to the very left–

LAURA: Grog! Stop!

ORION: Let's go, everybody!

MARISHA: There he goes!

LAURA: I'm gonna take off after him.

MATT: The heavy footsteps of Grog disappearing into the darkness–

TRAVIS: (maniacal laugh)

LAURA: We take off after him, 'cause he needs help.

ORION: Let's go!

MARISHA: Grog, Grog! Don't run too far ahead– He's gone.

MATT: You guys give chase.

LAURA: Yes.

LIAM: It's like having Goofy as a party member.

(all laugh)

LIAM: (Goofy laugh)

ASHLEY: Hodor!

TRAVIS: Hah. Hodor.

ASHLEY: Hodor.

MATT: As you guys catch up to Grog, which isn't too hard–

TRAVIS: What? I'm fast.

MATT: Are you going to a full sprint, though?

TRAVIS: No, no, no. I mean. A leisurely jog.

MATT: Right. You catch up to Grog. The tunnel itself is about 30 feet wide, 20 feet tall. And it is a slow, continuously gradual decline and curve to the left.

LAURA: Can you do another wall?

MATT: Like a spiral, downward.

LAURA: No?

TRAVIS: Maybe we could do a cave-in.

LAURA: Well, that might be dangerous.

TRAVIS: Yeah, but it'd be fun.

MATT: You guys continue for another 20 or so minutes down, before it opens up into a small alcove to the right, but the tunnel continues. This alcove, it's about 35, 40 feet in, and it looks like there are remnants here of a camp that was set up once. Similar to the war camp, but once again abandoned, or at least currently not in use.

LIAM: Any useful shit?

LAURA: Can we go, oh! Can we go in? We should probably rest, heal up, get our spells back. Can you cast the illusion terrain and make it look like there's no hole in the cavern here?

MARISHA: No. I can't, today. I'm sorry.

ORION: If this is where we're gonna be chilling, I can seal off that tunnel still.

LAURA: But we have to be able to get back out.

ORION: Right.

TRAVIS: Not necessarily.

ASHLEY: If I–

LIAM: No! If you seal off the passage, right, we keep going down, and if that's a dead end– it's probably not– if it is, can't we rest and use the same spell to open it up?

ORION: No, it's permanent.

LIAM: That sucks.

ORION: But we would just have Grog hack away at it for a while–

TRAVIS: Thank you!

ORION: It can be, you know, destroyed.

TRAVIS: They do call me 'Grog the Locksmith.'

ORION: Right!

TRAVIS: They don't call me that.

LAURA: Can we go in and look at the camp and see, like, stealthily–

MATT: Yeah!

LAURA: – check out what the camp is?

MARISHA: I can make it really foggy.

MATT: Go ahead and make an investigate check.

MARISHA: I could do that.

LIAM: Yes, we know that about you.

TRAVIS: Oh, I can too!

LIAM: What about in the game, though?

MARISHA: I can make it look like a–

LAURA: 20.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: Well, that's a different story.

MATT: As you guys are having this conversation, Vex does a quick glance over, there are about four tents that are still set up, there appears to be a small ring where a fire was set up, and you can see kind of bits of charcoal–

TALIESIN: Yes!

MATT: – and bits of long, long, long forgotten burnt meat, remnants, charcoal, and such there.

TRAVIS: I have two firewood bundles.

TALIESIN: I'm gonna look for a seal, to see if there's a seal anywhere around.

MATT: You do see, on one of the walls–

TALIESIN: Bam!

MATT: – there is a similar seal of Bahamut.

LAURA: (gasps) Oh! This was her camp!

TALIESIN: Kima was here!

LAURA: Kima was here!

MARISHA: #kimawashere.

MATT: However, there are four tents here–

LAURA: Oh.

ORION: Kima was here.

MATT: Which means– previously you saw just one, from what you saw. There are four here.

TRAVIS: She had babies.

MATT: It's an interesting change to your appearance. Means either been repurposed, or there were more people with her, or since then the tent, the camp has been used by other individuals aside from her.

TRAVIS: Oh.

MATT: However, glancing through, you do notice that there are a few discarded travel bags–

LAURA: Mine! Mine! Mine!

MARISHA: Ooh!

MATT: – carrying rope, grappling hooks, general cluster of torches, about eight in total–

LAURA: Okay, that's nice. Torch, torch, torch, torch.

TRAVIS: Thank you! Bag of holding, bag of holding.

MATT: And as you glance about you can see, in this alcove, looking at the dirt itself, it looks like there was a serious struggle. You can start seeing drag mark–

LAURA: Can I use Tracking and see what happened, like Prince Humperdink, please? Can do?

MATT: Ah, well, this is part of your investigation roll, essentially.

LAURA: Okay, okay.

MATT: Unless you want to track to where the tracks went, that's a different story. That's–

LAURA: Well, can I see who was attacked first? Does it look like Kima was attacked, or she–

MATT: It's hard to tell, you see some of the footsteps, and some of the drag marks, while mostly worn over, elements do show some of the fairer folk. The duergar have a very distinct footprint or size. You do see one that resembles more of, like, gnomish or halfling origin. You see drag marks in the dirt, you see other individuals, looks like there were chunks of rock that have been chopped off the side of the wall that look fresh, where you can see the soot that has settled into this part of the cavern is no longer visible where these scratch marks basically took off and exposed fresh rock.

LAURA: The drag marks, do they lead outside of the alcove and down?

MATT: They do, and they lead down the tunnel further.

LAURA: Okay.

TRAVIS: Let's go that way, or are we resting?

LAURA: Do we need to rest? I mean–

LIAM: I think we should rest.

ORION: I need to rest.

LAURA: – I feel like we need to get our spells back, otherwise we're just gonna get killed.

ORION: Yes.

MARISHA: Are we being chased right now?

TALIESIN: Possibly.

ORION: Possibly.

MARISHA: Are people hot on our tail?

ORION: Possibly.

TALIESIN: We can rest in shifts.

LAURA: Yeah. I guess that's the best thing to do.

TRAVIS: I'll stay awake.

LIAM: I'm totally fine at the moment, so I'll stay awake too.

ORION: Should I seal the tunnel?

MARISHA: I need to sleep.

LAURA: Maybe seal the tunnel behind us, yeah, so that–

LIAM: Yes.

LAURA: – if they do come, they have to like, try to get through.

ASHLEY: I can stay, I can stay awake too, I'm okay.

ORION: Cool.

ASHLEY: So maybe everybody sleep–

ORION: So I do.

MATT: Okay. So you use your spell, you seal off the tunnel with pillars. You can just barely get most of the entranceway covered, there's a couple of small slivers and spaces between.

ORION: But we would sure hear them, if they were–

LAURA: Trying to get through, yeah.

MATT: Yeah. If they were.

LAURA: All right.

MATT: All right. So you guys end up making camp, are you guys lighting a fire? Or are you keeping it dark? What's your plan?

TRAVIS: Yeah. I've got two firewood bundles in the bag of Ikea holding.

TALIESIN: I don't think we need a fire.

LIAM: I don't think it's a good idea.

ASHLEY: Do we need a fire?

LAURA: Yeah.

LIAM: We're fine. It's warm down here.

MATT: It's fairly warm.

LIAM: Yes.

ORION: Oh.

TRAVIS: Then, no?

(all laugh)

LIAM: We've got Tiberius, if he's awake, can cast Light, let's just go into one of these tents.

TRAVIS: I wanna burn something.

LAURA: I know.

MARISHA: Yeah, two to a tent.

LAURA: You can keep burning a torch.

MARISHA: We can each have our own tent! There's enough.

LAURA: Stick it in the ground.

TRAVIS: Is there anything made of wood down here?

ORION: I actually have to rest completely, so I can't do shifts.

TRAVIS: I want to set it on fire.

MATT: Okay. Fair enough.

ORION: I need all my spell slots.

MARISHA: I need to sleep as well.

MATT: What wood there is, is used charcoal in the abandoned fire pit, unfortunately.

ASHLEY: Yeah, but can you–

TRAVIS: I wanted to pyro shit.

MATT: You guys get set up?

LIAM: I pull out some dice, so that Grog and I can gamble while everyone are sleeping.

TRAVIS: Ooh!

MATT: Fair enough.

TALIESIN: How much does a rest heal? Out of curiosity?

MATT: A rest heals you to full.

TALIESIN: Oh, excellent.

LAURA: Oh, sweet! Yeah, let's fully rest.

TALIESIN: Do I have time to do a quick engineering feat, as well?

MATT: You do not have–

TALIESIN: Oh, okay. Never mind.

MATT: Like at this point, I mean, you could– what're you trying to do? I should say.

TALIESIN: Make an explosive arrow. I'm just in a mood.

MATT: Do you have any currently built explosives?

TALIESIN: No, but I have gunpowder.

MATT: You know what, I'll let you go ahead and try it with just your tinker's kit–

TALIESIN: Yeah.

LAURA: Tinker's?

MATT: It's gonna be a difficult–

TALIESIN: That's fine!

MATT: – roll, but go for it.

TALIESIN: What do I add? Am I just straight roll?

MATT: You add your proficiency bonus, which is, the tinker's kit is four.

TALIESIN: Oh, okay. Proficiency bonus. 15?

MATT: 15? Okay, okay. You manage to fasten what appears to be a black powder, impact-based explosive to the tip of an arrow. It's a little weighty and unwieldy, it might not be the most accurate thing in the world, but if it hits it's probably gonna pack a punch.

TALIESIN: Okay. I have another gift.

LAURA: You do?

TALIESIN: Explosive arrow!

LAURA: This is the best day ever!

TALIESIN: It's a bit iffy.

LIAM: (Cary Elwes voice) Gently! Gently!

ORION: It's a bit iffy.

LAURA: Gently!

MARISHA: Don't trust it!

TALIESIN: It's a bit iffy.

LAURA: I gingerly put it in my quiver.

ORION: More like a shotgun.

TALIESIN: It'll get better. It'll get better.

TRAVIS: Can you make me an explosive axe?

MATT: You very gingerly place it within your quiver.

LAURA: Oh god, all right.

TALIESIN: I don't think you want an explosive axe.

MATT: It's heavy in the tip.

TRAVIS: Why?

MATT: It's one of those things where, you know, shooting it is going to be an interesting challenge.

LAURA: Should I keep it away from the rest of my stuff?

MATT: That's up to you!

LAURA: Is there a possibility it could explode just–

ORION: You haven't even played with your hammer yet!

MATT: I dunno.

TALIESIN: It's very unlikely to explode on by itself. 'Cause it needs to be moving at a high speed. But it's just not the best thing ever.

LAURA: Maybe I won't keep it straight behind my head.

TALIESIN: Yeah, no. Not straight behind.

LAURA: Let's just kind of keep it down at my waist–

LIAM: Off to the side.

LAURA: With the dagger, maybe.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Is that cool?

TALIESIN: The next one will be better.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: All right. Did we all rest? Are we all rested?

TALIESIN: Yep.

MATT: As the evening transpires, you all get your evenings of rest, you guys kind of keeping watch, gambling away. At a certain point, throughout the evening, something perks up your ears. You begin hearing footsteps, many footsteps.

LIAM: Many footsteps.

LAURA: (gasps) Oh no. How many is many? A lot.

LIAM: How many does it sound like?

MATT: It sounds like anywhere between six, ten, more–

LIAM: From, right, from up? Or down.

MATT: From above, yeah.

LIAM: From above.

TRAVIS: Up. Oh.

LAURA: We should wake up.

ASHLEY: From above?

TRAVIS: Like, the ceiling? Or–

LAURA: Well like the– no, no, no. From like–

ASHLEY: Like where you have the–

LAURA: Up the path, right?

MATT: Up the path you guys came from.

LIAM: Wait. Grog and I are the only ones awake, right?

ASHLEY: That he shielded off?

ORION: Yeah, it's sealed.

TRAVIS: Yep.

MATT: Yep.

LIAM: Grog and I are the only ones awake.

ORION: Right.

LIAM: Do we lay low, and hold quiet in these tents? Or do we get everyone up?

LAURA: They're gonna know, 'cause we blocked off the friggin' path! I'm asleep. Sorry.

LIAM: Yeah.

ASHLEY: I'm still awake.

TRAVIS: Lay low. Let them come.

LIAM: I think so.

LAURA: (whispers) What? You're just really–

TRAVIS: Keep sleeping and shut up!

LIAM: No, no, no, I rouse my sister quietly.

LAURA: What?

TRAVIS: Oh. Fine.

LIAM: She's in this tent.

TRAVIS: Wake her up.

LAURA: What's going–

LIAM: (whispers) Quiet.

MATT: All right. Leaving the rest asleep?

LIAM: Yeah.

LAURA: I stealth.

MATT: The three of you make a stealth check.

TRAVIS: I stealth as well.

MATT: You do, Grog. You do.

LAURA: God damn.

TRAVIS: Fuck yeah! A two!

LAURA: I should stop rolling this fucking dice.

TRAVIS: 17.

ASHLEY: Wait, are you guys asleep?

LIAM: 23.

MARISHA: I'm still passed out.

LAURA: Oh! Yeah, that was a one. This, by the way–

MATT: Again?

LAURA: – was given to me by Wil Wheaton.

TRAVIS: Yeah. Wake up your sister.

LAURA: Thank you, Wil.

TRAVIS: It was just us boys–

MATT: Thank you, Wil.

TRAVIS: – and then you woke her up.

MATT: All right, so–

ASHLEY: Wait, I was awake too.

MATT: You were awake too?

ASHLEY: Yes.

MATT: At this point? You weren't resting?

TRAVIS: What. You?

LAURA: No, she was–

TRAVIS: Oh, she was actually awake.

ASHLEY: Because I was, I was still at full–

LAURA: (whispers) But you needed your spells.

MATT: Okay, then–

ASHLEY: Oh, but my spells? Actually–

MATT: If you're not resting you don't get your spells back.

ORION: Yeah, you need–

ASHLEY: – I fell asleep! I totally forgot. I am sound asleep.

MARISHA: Totally forgot I fell asleep!

ASHLEY: I was dreaming–

TRAVIS: She dreamed, in the dream she was still awake.

MATT: You are welcome to stay awake if you want, but you just won't get your spells back.

ASHLEY: I was dreaming, it was real–

MATT: You'd probably be exhausted.

ASHLEY: – I was so confused, by my dream.

TALIESIN: You were just going all Inception on us.

LIAM: You know, when you can't fall asleep–

ASHLEY: My perception was off.

LIAM: – and you're like, am I dreaming? Or is this the dream? Or is it real?

TALIESIN: Spin the top. Spin the top.

ASHLEY: I was totally sleeping.

LIAM: And you wake up, and you have to pee, it's hard to tell.

ASHLEY: And I spaced.

TRAVIS: So the three of us are up.

ASHLEY: I was asleep.

MATT: All right. So. Between the three of you, thankfully, you had two successes against one failure. You manage to cover for your sister–

LIAM: Shake it off.

LAURA: Thank you, thank you.

MATT: – who, who, 'Huh? What? What?'

LAURA: Ah– what? What?

MATT: When you wake her up.

LIAM: Sh! Sh.

MATT: You guys quietly wait–

TRAVIS: Oh no, that was a bad expression!

LIAM: Daggers out! Daggers out!

ASHLEY: Or that was good?

MATT: All right. So.

LAURA: Oh no. Did eyebrows go up?

TALIESIN: (whistles In the Hall of the Mountain King)

MATT: The footsteps progress through, and you– there's no light source, as duergar for the most part do not require light to see in the tunnels.

LAURA: Can we see through the dark– but we can see in the dark?

MATT: You guys have low-light vision, not dark vision.

LIAM: Not dark vision.

LAURA: There's no light in this area at all?

TRAVIS: No! It's balls-ass dark!

LIAM: There's no fire–

MATT: No, it is pitch black. You just hear–

LIAM: On purpose no fire.

MATT: – you just hear the footprints go by.

TRAVIS: Good thing we didn't make a campfire!

LIAM: Sh, sh!

MATT: You hear them approach the outskirts of the alcove.

ASHLEY: I have dark vision, gosh dang it!

MATT: But you're asleep.

ASHLEY: I'm fucking sleeping.

MATT: Yes, you are.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Bad choices, all around!

LIAM: They're going!

MATT: As the footsteps approach the outskirts of the alcove, the rest of you sleeping soundly, unaware of what's transpiring– A few moments pass, and the footprints appear to be passing, past, downward into the tunnel.

(all laugh)

MATT: Eventually, when the footfalls dissipate, and silence once again takes the camp, you breathe a sigh of relief and remove your hand from Vex's face.

TRAVIS: Well, maybe just leave it there.

LIAM: Last time I did that I got kicked in the nuts, very hard.

TRAVIS: And liked it.

MATT: All right. So. Eventually, when you feel enough time has passed, where those who've been resting come from their sleep, spells recovered, wounds are healed, except for those who didn't sleep, you guys maintain the same health you had previously.

ASHLEY: What a good sleep I've had! I have all my spells back!

MATT: That also puts a level of exhaustion– So. There is one level of exhaustion on both of you currently.

LIAM: Sure. So what does that do to us?

LAURA: Oh no.

ORION: Ah. You fools!

MATT: It just means any ability checks you take–

LIAM: Yes.

MATT: So, any skills you take are at disadvantage until you get a full night's rest.

TRAVIS: I'll take one more level two potion right now.

LIAM: Skill? Skill. Okay.

TRAVIS: One more level two potion.

MATT: Okay. You can use– remember, you can use your hit dice to heal still, before you start throwing potions around. If you have a moment to rest–

LAURA: Hit dice. We forgot about that because it wasn't there before.

MATT: Yeah. (sings) Fifth Edition! Before you start throwing potions around, 'cause remember, you're far away from civilization right now, you have a very limited number of potions now to lead you through here, unless you find some way to return to the surface.

LIAM: Just for emergencies.

ORION: What's happening?

LIAM: In combat.

MATT: So. You all eventually come back to consciousness, in this darkened alcove, pitch black. It is still warm, slight smell of soot and dust in the air, what do you guys want to do?

LIAM: I have a question.

MATT: Yes.

LIAM: Outside of existence. Tiberius put up a stone, right?

MATT: Mm-hm.

LIAM: But I didn't hear any (impact sounds), right?

LAURA: Oh, no, he put it up next to our alcove. So, they just kind of passed by our alcove.

MATT: It basically matched the wall as you guys went around.

LIAM: Oh. So we sealed ourselves into this little pocket?

LAURA: Yes. We did.

LIAM: Oh. We didn't even friggin' need to hide in the tent! We were in a little bubble of air!

LAURA: Well, no, well, it's pillars, though, they could have–

MATT: You're not completely in there.

LAURA: – they could have seen us.

LIAM: Okay.

MATT: He could block off most of it, there's like little spaces between–

LIAM: Spaces. Okay. All right. Thank you.

LAURA: I think we should all freshen up, since it's a new day!

LIAM: Right. We're all healed, maybe– Does anyone have to pee? Or perhaps–

LAURA: Yeah, that.

ASHLEY: Yeah.

LAURA: That.

ORION: Is anyone particularly dirty?

LAURA: Intermission!

MATT: Indeed. So. This, given the point in time that you all wake from your slumber, we'll continue this in a few minutes. In the meantime, we're gonna go ahead and go to our intermission break. See you guys back here in about 12 minutes or so.
Break

MARISHA: Oh, cool.

ZAC: So we're gonna update everyone real quick.

MATT: All right, what you got, man?

ZAC: You guys can go, you guys can go.

MATT: Go, go!

ZAC: Matt and I are gonna chat. Lucas, can you turn down all the other mics while they're exiting?

(fart noises in background)

ZAC: So guys, we already gave away one promo kit, so we reached our first goal.

MATT: Awesome. Fantastic.

ZAC: That's one. I'm gonna bring out a poster for you guys to sign that we'll put inside the promo kit with it.

MATT: Perfect.

ZAC: And we're actually pretty close to giving away our second promo kit. So, just so you guys know– what the shit? If we get another 50, I think it's like 40 more, or 38 more? The number's on the bottom. We'll give away another promo kit, and these guys will all sign the poster that goes inside, and we'll get that shipped out to you as quickly as possible.

MATT: Yeah, do it.

ZAC: That's pretty much the only update there. Oh, do you want to make a quick mention about the charity that you guys work with? Because we've been posting that in the chat room.

MATT: Yes, yes. Yes, 826LA, guys, is a charity that we've been trying to raise money for. Essentially, it's a Los Angeles-based, also in San Francisco and other parts of the nation. It helps teach and tutor children in literacy, storytelling– it's a really great charity. Go ahead and look on the website 826LA.com for any and all information you require on it. But they are a really good cause, they're good people, and been a fan of their work for a long time. So we are happy to help however we can and however you guys are able to help as well. So.

ZAC: Great. If the mods want to post the command 'criticalrole', you guys can link to that charity and we'll go ahead and roll those videos so you guys can get updated on the characters, and we'll be back in a little bit.

MATT: See you guys in a little bit.

[character intros]
Part II

MATT: Welcome back, guys. All right, I think everyone is sufficiently rested and bathroom breaked.

LAURA: Yep.

MATT: And so we will pick it back up. So as you all regain consciousness and prepare yourselves for the day ahead, once again, you've gone a number of days without sunlight, without any vision of the sky. It's a very disorienting experience for all of you who are unfamiliar with subterranean territory. Even though you are rested, you don't feel rested. There's kinks in your back from the rocky floor. The best you could find yourself any sort of comfort here is from whatever you have on your back. Most of you sleep in your armor out of necessity and paranoia. As consciousness comes to you, you guys are able to try and find your way back out now that you've been sealed in.

LAURA: Can we squish through the little cracks?

MATT: No.

LAURA: We have to cut it down?

MATT: You have about a five, six-inch gap between each of them.

LAURA: So we've gotta break our way out of here, Grog.

TRAVIS: Oh, do I get to hit things?

MATT: You do.

LIAM: Start smacking the wall.

TRAVIS: My god.

ASHLEY: Can I just give it a try, just to see? Try make a dent.

MATT: Yeah, go ahead and make an athletics check.

TRAVIS: And just to try it out, I would like bring out the flaming hammer of–

MATT: Actually, for this I would say it's a straight strength check. This is just physicality, strength against the stonework.

LIAM: Might need to take your armor off.

ASHLEY: Strength is?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

LAURA: Oh, it's right here.

TRAVIS: 23.

MATT: All right.

TRAVIS: With the hammer.

ASHLEY: Ten.

MARISHA: We're playing pillar pinata.

MATT: All right, so as Pike– as you go and swing at the pillar, you impact with all your might and the pillar cracks at the impact. You're like, 'that is awesome', then you look up a few inches and notice that Grog's ax is also in the same pillar.

ASHLEY: Oh.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Yay teamwork, teamwork.

TRAVIS: Yay, you loosened it up for me.

ASHLEY: Yeah I did!

MARISHA: Yeah.

LIAM: (singing) That's fuckin' teamwork.

ASHLEY: Best pals!

MATT: You guys, you take five or six minutes or so. You manage to hack away enough in one of the pillars to leave enough room to squeeze through. It takes a while. You manage to cleave that open. You all gather your things, you group together and you can continue in whichever direction you wish.

ASHLEY: Down.

TRAVIS: Yeah, we're going down.

MATT: All right, as you guys–

LAURA: Stealth!

LIAM: There are also some, I believe some duergar we didn't tell you–

LAURA: Ahead of us.

LIAM: Yes, while you were sleeping in the middle of the night, duergar walked– I assume–

LAURA: Dooragar?

LIAM: Duraga.

LIAM: (in odd accent) Duergar, some duergar walked down the passageway while you were sleeping.

TALIESIN: Doo-agar.

ORION: Duragar.

ASHLEY: Dooagar.

LIAM: But we thought it best to lay low and they went on.

MARISHA: That's good.

LAURA: Yes.

LIAM: So, steady as she goes.

LAURA: They might be ahead of us.

TALIESIN: We should probably be quiet.

MARISHA: Before we leave, I wanna go ahead and take a minute to meditate. If you guys can, you know, just watch while I meditate.

TALIESIN: Oh god.

LAURA: And lend our energy to you.

MARISHA: Yes, if you guys could lend your positive energy it would be very helpful.

TRAVIS: (fart sounds)

MARISHA: So I can Commune With Nature.

TALIESIN: I'll be out of the hole.

MARISHA: I want to do Commune (pronouncing incorrectly) With Nature.

MATT: Commune? (pronouncing correctly)

MARISHA: Yes, or Commune, whatever.

MATT: You wanna start a commune in nature?

TRAVIS: Commune.

MARISHA: Yeah, I want to start a commune in nature.

TALIESIN: Commune in a commune.

ORION: Can we do that? How high is that roll again?

MARISHA: Commune in commune in a commune.

LIAM: Going the homeopathic route, I like it.

MARISHA: That one.

MATT: Okay, keeping the best essence–

TALIESIN: Oh god.

MATT: – of the scenery around you, you take a moment. What's the reach of that one?

MARISHA: Just read it, where is it?

MATT: Whatcha got?

MARISHA: Three miles.

MATT: Three miles. The natural entities that you can sense in this cavern system are the few clusters of bats that exist in the back portion of the war camp that you guys just ran from. That's about it, I mean, there are a few other strange things that you've seen that live down here, but they wouldn't be anything that you would naturally sense.

TRAVIS: What more do you see?

MARISHA: Lots of bats. They're very nice bats

TRAVIS: Well, that's good.

ORION: I love bats.

MARISHA: Very pleasant, they're very friendly. That's about it.

ORION: Very good.

LAURA: Bats.

MARISHA and TALIESIN: Bats.

MARISHA: Okay, carry on, let's go.

TRAVIS: Oh, good.

LAURA: All right.

MARISHA: Thank you for your positive energy.

LAURA: Nice.

MATT: All right, you guys step back into the tunnel, all of you squeezing through with the rest of your materials, heading further down. About 15 minutes of travel go by and the very air itself is becoming steadily warmer.

TALIESIN: It's humid in here.

MATT: The smell is this combination of still water, groundwater type of a scent mixed with an ever-growing kind of sulfur-type, brimstone smell.

LIAM: Smells like Grog.

TRAVIS: I would like to trip Vax.

(all laugh)

LIAM: That was quick.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: As he's walking.

LIAM: I insult you and you trip me in a half a second? Would you like to take a shot at my nads as well?

LAURA: You knew it was coming, as well.

MATT: Make an athletics check.

TRAVIS: Yes! 24!

MATT: Make an acrobatics check.

TRAVIS: Suck it, elf.

LIAM: What goes around comes around, baby. 22.

MARISHA: Ooh.

MATT: (impact sound) Face down, Vax.

TRAVIS: Yes!

MATT: A slight bruise on the cheek as you go faceplanting into the stonework ahead of you.

TALIESIN: For god's sake.

LIAM: I'm going to voluntarily erase one hit point.

TRAVIS: What, what happened? What happened? Did you not stealth past that little pebble?

LIAM: It's all right, when the illithid general is bearing down on your walnut-sized brain–

TRAVIS: Yeah?

LIAM: I may be there, I may not.

ASHLEY: Hey! Don't be rude to him!

LAURA: You guys, you guys.

TRAVIS: Oh, I'm so happy right now.

LAURA: These caverns are getting to us.

(all laugh)

MATT: Clarota shuffles alongside you guys.

LIAM: Right, everyone, we're getting slap-happy.

LAURA: All right, all right, all right, let's call this.

TRAVIS: That's all I wanted.

ASHLEY: Lack of oxygen.

LAURA: We're going crazy down here.

MARISHA: Grog, it's only 9:30 in the morning.

ORION: I feel fine.

MARISHA: For christ's sake.

MATT: As you guys are walking, you're welcome to make chatter, any discussions you'd like.

LIAM: That was a high acrobatics roll. I think the DM wanted me to eat shit.

MATT: No, it was yours versus his.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

LAURA: Yeah.

LIAM: Oh, really? It was a direct contest?

MATT: It was a direct versus 24 versus 22. He won.

LIAM: You still wanted me to eat shit.

MATT: No, it's up to the rolls, man.

MARISHA: So wait, we get a chance to chat for a second?

ORION: Yes.

MARISHA: Pike, did you ever fully tell us what all you saw in your vision? I mean, have you perhaps had any more visions?

LAURA: Visions? You had a vision?

ASHLEY: I did, I did.

LAURA: What?

ASHLEY: So, when I stayed away, I went to a shrine of Sarenrae, just to sorta see, 'cause I had a feeling that I'd been here, or something like that. So in this vision, I basically saw what we've been going through already.

MARISHA: What?

ASHLEY: And what the soldier was talking about. So I saw something that was– there was a single twisted horn of blackened soul matter.

LAURA: Oh, soul matter?

MARISHA: Soul matter?

TALIESIN: Oh.

LIAM: Sounds dirty.

ASHLEY: It was a point of concentrated evil.

ORION: Oh.

LAURA: This horn?

ASHLEY: Yes.

MARISHA: Concentrated evil.

ORION: Nasty horn.

ASHLEY: And it was so strong that I couldn't stay in the vision, because I could feel that it was taking over, so I pulled me out of the dream, among various things. But I saw–

MARISHA: Like the horn of Sauron?

ASHLEY: The horn of Sauron, is what it said.

ORION: Is that your cousin?

LIAM: Did you see any whales?

LAURA: The horn of–

ASHLEY: I didn't see whales.

LIAM: No whales.

LAURA: Okay, no narwhals.

MARISHA: No whales, no narwhals.

LAURA: The horn of K'varn, yes?

ASHLEY: Yes.

LAURA: Okay.

MARISHA: Horn of evil.

ASHLEY: I some visions of where sort of– 'Cause I kind of went in past and then got to this thing. So I guess depending on where we are–

LAURA: Can you lead in the direction to go?

ASHLEY: Yes, if I see things that are familiar. Such as–

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: I went past a jagged onyx-colored fortress framed in molten rock.

LIAM: Oh.

LAURA: I think that probably–

MARISHA: The place we're heading.

LAURA: The place we're going to.

ASHLEY: Yes.

LIAM: That sounds creepy

ASHLEY: Past a field of broken glass and bone.

ORION: Right.

MARISHA: We haven't seen that. Oh no.

TRAVIS: Obsidian, maybe?

ASHLEY: Yeah.

TALIESIN: Or just melted sand.

TRAVIS: I mean, whatever that is.

ASHLEY: And the prettiest was into a cavern of blue crystal, where a fungal fortress–

LAURA: A fungal fortress?

MARISHA: Ooh.

ASHLEY: – sort of entwined an ancient city of marble and jade–

ORION: Three different places.

LIAM: That sounds really shitty.

LAURA: Did the blue gemstones look valuable?

MARISHA: It sounds amazing, that doesn't sound shitty.

MATT: As you start to mention that now, Clarota kind of nods and says,

LIAM: It feels a bit– broken glass.

MATT: “Aye, that's where the colony resides.”

LAURA: Your colony?

MATT: “Our great city.”

LIAM: In which of those places? In the–

LAURA: In the fungal city.

LIAM: Fungal.

MATT: “Amongst the ruins of jade and glass.”

LAURA: (whispers) Jade.

ORION: Is that where we should go?

MARISHA: That's Yug'Voril?

MATT: “Surrounded by the forest.”

MARISHA: That's Yug'Voril?

MATT: “The city below Yug'Voril, that is where the temple resides, where K'varn holds the Elder Brain.”

LAURA: Ah.

ORION: Ah, this is where we need to go, I'm assuming.

MATT: “Ah, yes.”

LIAM: He sounds like a real fun-guy.

TRAVIS: Oh god.

(all groan)

TALIESIN: Trip him again, trip him again.

MARISHA: Trip him again!

LIAM: I'm a dad.

(all laugh)

LAURA: So I bet the fortress–

MATT: Make a will saving throw.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Oh my god.

LIAM: What is that? Wisdom?

MATT: Yes.

LIAM: 12.

MATT: Okay, you feel a mental slap as Clarota glares at you from across the tunnel. “There'll be none of that in my presence.”

TRAVIS: You got bitch-slapped.

MATT: “I hate puns.”

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: (high-pitched voice) I hate puns.

LIAM: Noted, noted.

LAURA: So I bet, first fortress you saw, I bet the one of obsidian was where–

LIAM: Percy's losing his shit.

ORION: There's a bathroom right over there, Percy.

LAURA: – where Lady Kima is being held.

ASHLEY: I think–

LAURA: I bet that's the one, because he mentioned molten lava or something. So she's being held there and then further in is K'varn.

ASHLEY: Yeah.

ORION: So get there, get K'varn.

MATT: “Yes, Emberhold, yes.”

LAURA: Emberhold, yes. Is that an obsidian fortress?

MATT: “It is black and jagged, I think, yes.”

LAURA: Well, let's keep going that way.

MARISHA: So the ultimate question is, are we heading the right way? Are we heading the right way, Pike, do you know?

ASHLEY: Can I perception check?

(all laugh)

MATT: You guys are unfamiliar with this tunnel, Clarota is unfamiliar with this tunnel. All you know is it's going down. That's better than up.

ASHLEY: I feel like that's the way we need to go.

LAURA: So, just keep going, then?

TALIESIN: Let's keep going.

TRAVIS: Do I need to take off running again?

LAURA: No.

ASHLEY: I think basically we need to go down, 'cause if we go up that means we're going out.

LAURA: Yeah, let's keep going.

TRAVIS: We can go–

MATT: You guys press forward and you begin to encounter little trickles on the ceiling of orange, glowing little puddles.

LAURA: Avoid that!

MARISHA: If we learned anything from Minecraft–

(all laugh)

LAURA: Don't touch that.

MATT: Progressing further down, you start seeing large clusters, little pools of molten rock beginning to form under certain sections. In a little ways up, you begin hearing some additional footsteps to your own. Further down the tunnel.

LAURA: Oh. Can we stealth, can we stealth? And my favored terrain is the Underdark.

MATT: It is.

LAURA: I don't know what that means, though.

(all laugh)

LAURA: No, no, no, I know. But I don't know what favored terrain gives me, because I tried to look it up and couldn't find it.

ASHLEY: You just love it.

LAURA: Does it give me an advantage?

MATT: Here, there's a sheet that has all the information you need.

LAURA: Oh good, thank you.

ORION: By the way, I take one of the earrings from Scanlan and give it to Grog. So Grog, now you've got one of the–

TRAVIS: I've got an earring?

MATT: Scanlan is not happy about this.

ORION: Well? He's not saying anything.

LIAM: Everyone, there's footsteps coming from ahead. Let Vex'ahlia and I scout ahead. Wait for a moment.

LAURA: Yes, okay. Let's go.

MATT: Stealth checks, both of you.

LAURA: Yes, finally.

LIAM: 22 for me.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: The same for me, actually. Twinsies. Sorry.

MATT: All right, so you guys vanish into the darkness best as you can tell, kind of weaving between the portions of the tunnel that naturally shift and give you moments where you can hide up inside. As you guys hold back, you guys push ahead, and you can see the little points of glowing light where these lava pools every 100 or so feet begin to appear. You begin listening out, and you hear these footfalls are very heavy, and the gait of whoever is walking seems to be wider than that of the normal humanoid.

TRAVIS: Ah, let me play. Please.

LIAM: Well it's definitely not duergar. How far ahead of us do they sound?

LAURA: Can we see it?

MATT: Probably a good 60, 70 feet. You hear some muttering.

LAURA: Can I understand what they're saying?

MATT: No.

LIAM: I'm listening, trying to make out how many sets of footsteps I can hear.

LAURA: And I look on the ground and see if I can find multiple sets of footsteps as well.

MATT: Looking on the ground, you guys have no light source currently. It's pitch black.

LIAM: But there's lava spilling and we can see in dim light.

MATT: Do you want to go to the nearest lava pool? All right. It's very, very faint visual. You can see there are a number of tracks, up and down. All different sizes. This area, this tunnel is traversed quite a lot. Listening, you hear two sets of heavy footsteps. And you hear what sounds like some sort of squeak sound, like a (squeaks).

TRAVIS: Shit.

LIAM: Cart. Could be some sort of device–

MATT: From around the edge, you can just barely make out these two lumbering humanoid shapes.

LIAM: Can we tell what they are?

LAURA: Oh, he's trying to see if they're seeing us.

LIAM: Yes.

MATT: They begin to step towards your direction.

LAURA: We back away.

MATT: You guys back and kind of flatten yourself against the wall.

LIAM: Separate sides.

MATT: You can see they're now both dragging behind them this small roughshod cart, with something inside it.

LAURA: We string a rope across the tunnel.

MATT: Okay, you pull it across.

MARISHA: Oh, yeah!

MATT: (deep grumbling and laughter)

LIAM: I also yank my serpentine belt off–

LAURA: Oh!

LIAM: And throw it out, right under the rope.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: What does that do?

LIAM: Snake.

MATT: So, as he throws the leather, the leather shifts form suddenly in midair into a serpent that slips onto the ground, and slithers in place, curling up at the approaching two monolithic entities.

LAURA: That is stupid.

LIAM: Yes, it is.

LAURA: This is gonna go really poorly.

MATT: As they begin to cross in front of you, you both pull taut on the rope.

LAURA: This is dumb.

MATT: The immediate one falls forward, tripping face-first on the ground, a heavy (impact sound). You guys hear in the distance this loud thud, impact sound.

LAURA: And we call, I go, Grog!

TRAVIS: I'm raging.

LIAM: And I leap out, daggers at the fallen one.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: Run!

MATT: You guys come rushing in, let's go ahead and roll initiative.

TALIESIN: Yeah!

TRAVIS: I raged.

MATT: I figured you were raging.

TRAVIS: Well, you know, when the ladies call my name.

TALIESIN: That sucks.

MARISHA: That's not too bad, could be worse.

ORION: Yes, sounds good.

MARISHA: What are we fighting? What are we fighting?

LAURA: I know, right? Oh god, here we go.

MARISHA: What are we fighting, we don't know.

LAURA: Oh! Lava pools.

TALIESIN: Lava pools.

MARISHA: Lava pools, Lava pools.

TRAVIS: Wow.

ASHLEY: Wow.

MARISHA: Grog, you better be throwing bitches into that lava.

TRAVIS: Last time I tried to do somebody to something, I did it to myself, so.

LIAM: Hashtag bitches in lava?

MARISHA: Hashtag bitches in lava!

MATT: You guys, coming in this way.

MARISHA: Bitches in lava, bitches in lava.

ASHLEY and LAURA: Oh god!

ORION: She's excited about the lava.

LIAM: I got 99 problems and a troll ain't one.

LAURA: Are they trolls, are they ogres?

MATT: They are two giant ogres.

LAURA: Oh, god, one's on the ground.

TRAVIS: Oh, shit.

LAURA: It's huge, these are really big.

MATT: One is back here and one's just fallen over there.

ASHLEY: Holy cow.

MATT: And they are carrying some sort of large cart-like object, I'll just say for now.

LAURA: This is so dumb, why did we do this?

TALIESIN: This is a d20.

MATT: Let's say it's about there. All right.

TRAVIS: What's in the cart?

MATT: So, initiative order, guys?

LAURA: Do we get the surprise at all?

MATT: You do, actually! I'm rolling initiative, so we have the order. You guys are gonna have a full round of surprise on them first.

LAURA: Okay, cool.

MATT: All right, so, 25 to 20?

LAURA: Oh, man, really?

MATT: 20 to 15?

ORION: 19.

LAURA: 15.

LIAM: 15.

ORION: I got scared and I cast Stoneskin immediately.

ASHLEY: Cast what?

ORION: Stoneskin.

MATT: So Vex and Vax, both at 15?

LAURA: Yeah.

LIAM: 15, yeah.

LIAM and LAURA: Oh!

MATT: 15 to ten?

TALIESIN: 13.

MARISHA: 13 as well.

ASHLEY: 11.

LAURA: Oh no, Grog, what did you roll?

TRAVIS: I farted when I rolled, I rolled a nine.

MATT: Oh! Grog.

ASHLEY: Greg.

ORION: How much does the ogre weigh? Or the ogres, as you said?

MATT: The ogres, each one weighs nearly a ton.

TRAVIS: Oh, shit, really?

LAURA: Oh, they're huge.

TRAVIS: So, like, 200 pounds.

MATT and LIAM: Yes.

LIAM: Yes, exactly.

MATT: Yes, Grog, close to that.

LAURA: Yes, Grog.

MATT: All right, let's go fast here. Here we go. All right, so, top of the round– No! Surprise round for both of you guys first, as the rest of you rush in, so Vex and Vax, you guys get a surprise round.

LAURA: Awesome.

LIAM: I'm already jumping in the air, so I'm gonna go.

MATT: To the guy on the ground.

LIAM: Okay, and this, since it's a surprise, it's automatic crit?

MATT: Yes!

LAURA: Oh, nice.

MARISHA: Hell, yeah!

MATT: He's on the ground, so you get advantage on your attack rolls.

LIAM: Okay, okay, all right, so that's 28.

MATT: That definitively hits.

LIAM: Yeah, 1d4 for– this is my poison dagger. Two, eight, okay, I'm doing my Sneak Attack damage, here we go, four, nine, 12, 18, yeah, 23. Total for that, 62 points of damage.

MATT: 62 points of damage.

LAURA: Wow.

MATT: You leap on and entirely eviscerate the ogre. You jumped onto his back, slashing the back of his torso. As you pull open the flesh, you expose the back of the ribcage, and he goes into this kind of gurgling sound as it dies immediately on the spot.

LAURA, MARISHA and ASHLEY: Oh, what?

LIAM: And I use my bonus action to hide.

MATT: Okay.

TRAVIS: Do you wanna talk to the other one, since–

LAURA: 62.

MATT: Okay, roll and make a stealth check.

LIAM: Natural 20.

ORION: Nice.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: See you later, motherfuckers.

MATT: The ogre is right there. There is the ogre on the ground, big squishy ogre.

LAURA: What?

TRAVIS: Big squishy ogre.

MATT: It's considered rough terrain, because now you have to go over this giant dead body in the middle of the– All right, your turn.

LAURA: I Hunter's Mark him, and I'm gonna shoot him with the explosive arrow.

TALIESIN: Yeah!

TRAVIS: I like it.

LAURA: So I'm gonna see if it hits. I'm gonna use the blazing bowstring. That's a 22.

MATT: 22 definitely hits.

LAURA: Okay. Also, blazing bowstring that gives me a plus d10. So, okay, 14 plus d10, wait, that's a ten? Yeah!

LIAM: That's a ten.

LAURA: Plus 19 and then Hunter's Mark! Plus six!

LIAM: Ah yes!

MATT: 25.

LAURA: 25, plus whatever the explosive damage is.

MATT: So! As you pull the arrow out, it's a little wonky, it's actually, what you rolled, it's a minus four penalty to hit with it, but you still manage to hit because it's a big creature, even though it's in very big darkness, you– you know, in darkness you ignore partial cover.

LAURA: Right!

LIAM: Bellybutton.

MATT: You fire it. It arcs slightly, smacks in the side of its chest and stomach area. It's this cacophonous explosion sound that rocks the immediate vicinity.

TALIESIN: Whoa! Yes!

TRAVIS: Yes!

MATT: It takes an additional 2d8 points of explosive damage.

MARISHA: Ooh!

TALIESIN: Yeah!

ORION: Nice.

MATT: Nine points, and everything around it also takes the additional damage–

LAURA: Oh shit!

MATT: – the whole radius does.

LAURA: Oh, I hope I didn't blow up the cart.

MATT: The cart– the wood on the wheels had shatters and breaks, it falls to one side. What you see, some sort of a glass container that was at the back of the cart shatters and cracks.

LAURA: (gasps) Oh no.

MARISHA: Oh.

TALIESIN: I'm still happy.

LAURA: Welp?

LIAM: Still pretty cool, still pretty cool.

MARISHA: Collateral damage. It's bound to happen.

MATT: Top of the round. Tiberius.

LAURA: Oh, and can I move away?

MATT: You can move if you want. Yeah.

LAURA: Yeah, I move back.

MATT: Back to here?

LAURA: Yeah. Sounds good.

TRAVIS: Where's your pointer?

MATT: Use your pointer if you need it.

LAURA: Oh right! Well, there.

MATT: All right. Tiberius, you're up first.

ORION: Very good! I'll take a few steps forward and be like, well, this is poppycock! And I'll shoot a Scorching Ray right at the dude.

MATT: All right, go for it, roll for the attack.

LAURA: Does anybody speak Ogre? Nobody speaks Ogre, though. We can't talk to him.

TRAVIS: No.

LIAM: They're dumber than Grog is.

ORION: So what am I rolling?

MATT: Do you ignore partial cover?

ORION: Oh! Like can I just in general?

MATT: I mean, did you take that feat?

ORION: No.

MATT: No. Okay. So yeah. So you're rolling– okay, so yeah. So what did you roll to hit?

ORION: I rolled all three at once. 'Cause I have to do one for each.

MATT: Right, yeah.

ORION: So I got a 12, a 13, and a 12.

MATT: Okay. All three rays unfortunately miss–

ORION: Damn it!

MATT: – due to the darkness in this room it's very hard to see, other than the slight glow from the lava. So you fire all three rays, and you see them streak through, and each one gives off just enough light from the actual flaming ray to glow to the vicinity, but not the actual target. You see them both streak off and slam the wall on the opposite side.

ORION: Wait, do I add my dex on those?

MATT: You add your spell modifier.

ORION: (whispers) What's my spell modifier?

MATT: It's on top of your spell page!

ORION: Oh! Oh, no, I'm sorry, 20– plus nine on all that.

MATT: Good to know.

ORION: Yeah, sorry.

MATT: All three hit. Go ahead and roll damage.

ORION: Okay.

MATT: There you go.

ORION: Okay, first one does five–

MATT: It's his first time casting spells, guys.

(mouths) It's not.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

ORION: – plus five, ten! I rarely do this one, kids.

LIAM: It's part of his charm.

ORION: Ten on the first one.

MATT: All right.

ORION: 17 on the second one. And 17 on the second one.

LAURA: He's so dead!

MATT: Okay, is there a saving throw for half damage?

ORION: No! I mean, 12 on the third one.

MATT: Is there a saving throw on this one, or is it just straight damage?

ORION: Yeah, straight damage.

MATT: Okay, cool, gotcha. All right.

ORION: Yes!

MATT: All right, so you, you blast the ogre with three. As each explosion hits, you see the rippling of its kind of grotesque flesh from the impact, the third one blasting off a portion of its shoulder, exposing this meaty bone and blood. It gives out this horrible (roars) into the tunnel itself, causing just the atmosphere to shake, as bits of stone begin to rumble and fall from the ceiling. All right, that ends your turn?

ORION: Yeah!

MATT: Still standing. Barely. It's now its turn.

LAURA: (gasps)

MATT: It steps away.

LIAM: (whispers) You can't see me.

LAURA: Over the dead body of his brethren.

MATT: To that point. It's just going to charge through, as all it can see is the figures in the distance.

MARISHA: Pick me.

MATT: That's where it is. At which point, the cart seems to shift slightly.

TRAVIS: Oh shit.

LAURA: Oh no, what did we do?

LIAM: Oh dear, something's coming out of the jar.

MARISHA: What did we open?

LAURA: Oh, god. We let something out.

MATT: You can see something slowly– dark something–

ORION: I thought it was going to be a good thing!

MATT: – amorphous and liquid in nature beginning to shift in the shadow.

MARISHA: Oh, great.

LAURA: Does it– Oh no– Is it on fire so we can see–

LIAM: No.

LAURA: – is it on fire so we can see what it is?

MATT: No.

LIAM: No.

TALIESIN: Oh my god!

LAURA: The cart wasn't on fire?

LIAM: It's dangerous! It's dangerous! It's fucking dangerous!

MATT: It's just this giant, black, liquid–

MARISHA: What is that?

MATT: – ooze-like creature.

LIAM: It's black ooze. It's dangerous!

MARISHA: We just opened Pandora's box.

LAURA: This is really, really bad!

LIAM: It's fucking dangerous.

LAURA: I'm sorry I exploded it.

MARISHA: Great. That's good. Good.

LIAM: Stay away from it. Stay away from it. Stay away from it.

TRAVIS: So go wrestle it?

ASHLEY: So go jump in it, is what you're saying.

LIAM: French kiss that shit!

TRAVIS: It's mine!

LAURA: (whispers) Don't attack it.

TRAVIS: Don't attack it?

LAURA: I'm scared of it.

MARISHA: Black ooze.

LIAM: Ranged attacks.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: What does a black ooze do?

LIAM: Fire and ranged attacks.

MARISHA: How do I handle that?

MATT: So! That brings us to–

TALIESIN: Fire?

LIAM: Think!

MATT: Scanlan. Scanlan.

LAURA: Oh no, oh god, Scanlan.

MATT: I know you're out there, Scanlan.

LAURA: Do something amazing, Scanlan!

LIAM: Sing, Sam! Sing!

MATT: Scanlan's going to go ahead and sing a song of inspiration to– I'd say Grog just in case he needs to-

TALIESIN: (sings) When we have to fight the ooze, you'll never have to lose.

TRAVIS: What?

LAURA: You received an inspiration.

TRAVIS: Oh good, yeah, thank you. It's an eight, right?

MATT: Yeah, it's a d8 inspiration dice.

LAURA: I want some food. I'm so hungry.

LIAM: (sings) We're up all night in the dark, we're up all night in the dark.

TALIESIN and MARISHA: (sing) We're up all night in the dark.

ORION: Is that what Sam would do?

MATT: Scanlan is then going to cast Invisibility on himself as an immediate self-sustaining reaction.

LIAM: Oh shit, the music! The music!

MATT: That brings us to Vex!

LAURA: Me?

MATT: Yes.

LIAM: Ranged attack, ranged attack.

LAURA: Okay, on the thingie?

MARISHA: Pew pew.

ORION: Take out the ogre first.

LAURA: Okay. Well I'm gonna Lightning Bolt the black ooze!

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: Sounds good.

LAURA: Okay. Which–

MATT: So you Lightning Arrow.

LAURA: Yes, I do. Okay. Oh, and, oh, the other– never mind, that other guy's still Hunter's Marked. Okay.

MARISHA: Well, yeah.

LIAM: Hit it, hit it, hit it.

LAURA: Okay, that's good.

LIAM: Yes, it is!

LAURA: That's a 19 plus– that's a regular attack bonus, right?

LIAM: It's a crit.

LAURA: Was it?

LIAM: Isn't 19-20 crit? That's just for me.

MATT: No, that's just for you.

LAURA: That's just for you, yo.

MATT: Yeah, so that hits.

LAURA: Okay. So.

MARISHA: What if it's like a sentient alien lifeform?

ASHLEY: This music is so stressful!

LAURA: Okay, 4d8 of lightning damage.

MARISHA: You know, like some Spiderman shit.

MATT: Go ahead and roll the arrow damage.

MARISHA: Some alien lifeform shit.

TALIESIN: Well, we should kill it.

LAURA: Oh, okay.

MARISHA: Yeah.

LAURA: Just kidding, I'm just so excited! 11.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Okay. And the 4d8 of lightning damage.

MATT: As the arrow disappears into its form–

LAURA: No.

MATT: – the bolt of energy, as you pull out the arrow and release it, it sparks and you can see the blue energy kind of streaking behind the arrow. It plunges into this thick, black, gooey mass and as it does, the lightning just gets absorbed into its form.

TRAVIS: Oh, shit balls.

MATT: It sits for a second, shakes and quivers, and then splits.

MARISHA: Oh! No.

LAURA: Splits?

LIAM: Yeah, it splits into smaller ones. Smaller sizes.

MATT: Dividing into two separate smaller slimes.

TALIESIN: No!

LAURA: What is this thing?

MATT: Seemingly unaffected by the damage of the lightning. Other than the fact that you altered its form slightly.

LAURA: Great. Cool. Awesome.

MATT: So, do you wish to move?

LAURA: Oh, yeah! I back the eff up. Actually, should– yeah, yeah. I'm gonna back up. To there sounds good.

MATT: All right! That brings us to– Vax, you're up.

LIAM: All right, I'm gonna run up to the back of Tall and Ugly, and try to stab him. I'm gonna do the reach-around again, and try to stab him in the eyes.

ORION and ASHLEY: The ol' reach-around.

LIAM: And I'm hidden– I'm stealth already, I think, right?

ORION: Courteous!

MATT: You are, yes.

TRAVIS: It's like his character move.

TALIESIN: The stealthy reach-around.

TRAVIS: Action figure Vax'ahlia.

LIAM: So the first attack is an 18.

TALIESIN: The stealthy reach-around.

LAURA: That's Vax'ildan.

MATT: Hits.

TRAVIS: Sorry. Vax'ildan.

LIAM: Okay, Sneak Attack, here we go.

TRAVIS: The signature reach-around move!

LIAM: For the eyeballs. Two plus seven is–

LAURA: I'm sorry I let the ooze loose.

TALIESIN: It's okay.

LIAM: 40. 52.

MATT: 52. As you reach behind, the daggers plunge into it, and the ogre lumbering over doesn't have any more to its life. Its jaw just goes slack as it releases the last bit of air in its lungs, tumbling forward, piling onto his friend.

LIAM: As it does, I want to use my bonus action to spring off his shoulders towards my friends.

MATT: Okay. Okay.

LAURA: That's good.

MATT: This direction? All right, go ahead and make an acrobatics check.

LIAM: Sure.

LAURA: Over the lava pit.

TRAVIS: Kill it.

LAURA: Don't fall in the lava pit.

LIAM: That's a 15.

MATT: 15, okay. You barely manage to catch your footing. Thank god you didn't roll a one. That would've been very bad. This ogre then plummets to the ground, now piling on top of his friend.

LAURA: Okay, that's good.

MATT: So now that whole section there is considered rough terrain. All right, that brings us to Percy!

TALIESIN: Okay, I'm going to try something weird, here.

TRAVIS: Oh no.

TALIESIN: Where am I? Okay. I'm going to step forward and to the right a bit. Just sort of joining this little– like getting right in here. And I'm going to try and shoot, and this is gonna sound weird, but as I'm running I'm going to– Actually, back me up to about there.

MATT: There?

TALIESIN: I'm going to try and shoot about right here, I'm gonna try and unleash the lava to send the lava– to see if I can get it to start flowing towards. Does that make sense?

MATT: I will tell you, the pool of lava right there isn't brimming really close to the surface.

TALIESIN: Oh, it's just down?

MATT: It would take a significant impact to carve anything that would release it.

TALIESIN: Okay, well–

MATT: It's self-contained.

TALIESIN: – I've come forward enough, I'm gonna take a shot at one of these guys, then.

MATT: Okay. This one, or this one?

TALIESIN: That one.

MATT: Okay. Go ahead and roll for attack–

TALIESIN: I'm gonna try something else. I'm gonna try an ice shot.

MATT: Ice shot. Okay.

TALIESIN: 15?

MATT: 15?

LIAM: (sneezes dramatically)

LAURA: Bless you.

MATT: 15 hits!

TALIESIN: Oh my god. All right, and that's a–

TRAVIS: 15 hits.

LAURA: 15 hits.

TRAVIS: Let's just take it.

LAURA: Well, what else are we gonna do with it?

TALIESIN: – that's 15 points of damage, plus six points of ice damage.

MATT: Okay. The bullet pierces his form. You can see a part of its gelatinous, physical structure quiver. The ice explosion, you see go off, and just get absorbed into the gelatinous form.

MARISHA: Fuck.

TALIESIN: Fuck!

MATT: Seemingly unaffected by the additional damage. That's your first shot. You get two shots, don't you?

TALIESIN: That's right. Oh, good god.

MARISHA: But it didn't split, right?

MATT and ORION: Nope.

MARISHA: That's cool. It's a perk.

TALIESIN: Yeah, no, that's– Okay. I'm going to attempt to– Is there any loose-looking rocks that are up above? Or is there anything that looks like, if I gave it a push, would fall down, from up above?

MATT: This tunnel looks pretty, at this point, pretty cleanly carved out.

LAURA: What about the areas I exploded?

MATT: Over there? I mean, there's parts of the rock, but the explosion was more damaging to things that were fragile–

LAURA: Okay, okay.

MATT: – the stonework is pretty solid.

TALIESIN: I'm gonna take another shot at the same one and see what happens.

MATT: Okay, go for it.

TALIESIN: 20, that hits.

MATT: Yep! Damage.

TALIESIN: Not a lot. That's seven points of damage.

MATT: Okay. Gotcha. Both shots into it. You see its form kind of quiver at the impact, but it's still slowly slithering forward. Now comes to Keyleth!

MARISHA: Okay. I wanna move, kind of be like, whoops, sorry, 'scuse me, pardon me, and come like heresies. Would you say that I'm 30 feet away from that guy?

MATT: Just barely. Like, he's just in the cusp of 30 feet from you.

MARISHA: Will my Thorn Whip reach him? My 30-foot-range Thorn Whip?

MATT: You can certainly try!

MARISHA: I'm gonna try and Thorn Whip him!

MATT: Okay!

LIAM: (Cosby voice) You see, the black goo thing–

MATT: What's the Thorn Whip do?

LIAM: – is not so easy to kill.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Huh?

MATT: What's the Thorn Whip do? Read the spell for me.

ASHLEY: Too soon?

LAURA: Too soon?

MARISHA: Well, it does 2d6 damage, it's a 30-foot range, and it pulls 10 feet. Notes I have on it– Okay– piercing damage– if they are large or smaller, you pull the creature up to ten feet closer.

MATT: What type of damage is it?

MARISHA: Piercing.

MATT: Okay. Gotcha. All right. So, you hit, go ahead and roll damage.

MARISHA: I hit. I don't hit. That's funny. Okay.

MATT: You rolled a 20, right?

MARISHA: I didn't roll yet.

MATT: Oh, you didn't roll yet. Sorry.

MARISHA: No.

MATT: Okay, go ahead and roll to hit.

MARISHA: What do I add, my spell modifier?

MATT: Yep.

MARISHA: 18.

MATT: Yeah, you hit.

LAURA: Woo!

ASHLEY: Woo!

MATT: So, go ahead and roll damage.

MARISHA: 19, sorry, it's actually 19.

MATT: That still hits! It doesn't move very fast, it's a little easy to hit.

LAURA: Okay, that's good.

MATT: All right, takes its damage.

MARISHA: One piercing damage, but I pull him ten feet closer to me. Does he go into the lava?

MATT: Gets pushed just ever so slightly into the hole. As it does, you can see this blackish steam and smoke begin to billow up from where it hits, and it (growls).

LAURA: Good!

MATT: – begins to quiver as you're kind of yanking it back with the Thorn Whip.

LIAM: What was that sound it made again?

MATT: (growls)

(all laugh)

MATT: It takes 2d10 points of damage–

LAURA: Woo!

MATT: – from the impact of the lava. That's an additional 17 points of fire damage to it.

TALIESIN: That's nice.

LIAM: Yes!

LAURA: Fire damage!

ASHLEY: Nice!

LIAM: Aw, yes!

LAURA: Kill it with fire!

MARISHA: And I've got him on a leash now.

LIAM: Burn it!

MATT: You do. Is it considered grappled?

MARISHA: Nope.

MATT: Then that would be the end of the attack. The spell dissipates after that.

MARISHA: Oh, okay.

MATT: You've gotta do it again the next turn.

MARISHA: Okay.

LIAM: Hey, that was pretty good.

LAURA: Yep.

MATT: All right. That ends your turn, Pike, you're up!

ASHLEY: Okay. So, question. I want to use something I think that I can use called– this may be stupid, so I have another option if this is dumb.

TRAVIS: That's what it's called?

LAURA: (laughs)

ASHLEY: Yes.

ORION: That's a weird spell!

LIAM: So long!

ASHLEY: Something called 'Insect Plague'.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: Ooh, yeah!

ASHLEY: Which you can use as a ranged attack in a 20-foot-radius sphere?

MATT: Yes. So, you do it at range, and it creates a 20-foot radius that does this.

ASHLEY: Okay, and then it's a 1d10– creature takes 4d10 piercing damage– oh, on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: Cool! So there's that, yeah.

LIAM: Very Old Testament!

ASHLEY: So, I think–

MATT: Do you wanna move–

LAURA: Yeah, do it!

ASHLEY: Okay, you know, let's give it a try!

LAURA: And then we can see what it does to creatures within its zone!

MATT: Where do you wanna go, girl?

ASHLEY: Okay, so, where am I? I'm sorry, I can't see.

MATT: You're right over here. It's your gold base.

ASHLEY: So, where do I need to be to do it– like over here?

LIAM: Get closer.

LAURA: Maybe up next to the ogre dead.

LIAM: Gotta run up.

MATT: Okay. One, two, three, four. That's about as close as you can get there, yeah.

ASHLEY: Okay. So can I still get it there?

MATT: Yeah, you can cast it. Where do you want to put the radius?

ASHLEY: Are these all five?

ORION: Yeah.

MATT: These are all five-foot squares.

ASHLEY: Okay, so can I–

LIAM: I'd just like to point out, this is like the Avengers trailer, where all the heroes run out and jump at the same time.

(all laugh)

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: Yeah. Yeah, you can get these both from there.

ASHLEY: Okay, so I'll try to get them both.

MATT: Okay, all right, so–

ASHLEY: So then ten.

MATT: So you go ahead and roll the damage.

ASHLEY: Okay, so how– Wait, how many do I roll, again? At fifth level?

MATT: You're casting this as a fifth-level spell?

ASHLEY: Well, maybe I shouldn't–

MATT: It's up to you.

LAURA: Yeah, do it.

ASHLEY: Okay, I'll do it.

LIAM: Do it, do it, try it.

ASHLEY: But do I save a healing?

LIAM: Do it.

LAURA: Go for it, Pike.

LIAM: Come on, you're a warrior.

MATT: It's up to you, Pike. You do what you gotta do.

ASHLEY: Okay, so– Cool, one.

LAURA: Ten.

LIAM: Ten.

ASHLEY: Ten, 11.

LAURA: 18.

ASHLEY: 19.

MATT: Okay.

ASHLEY: So how many do I roll? That was three–

MATT: It gets to make a saving throw to see if it gets half damage.

ASHLEY: So I roll another one then–

LAURA: Yeah, four. She gets four.

MATT: What's–

ASHLEY: I roll, I roll four. Hold on. 19.

LAURA: 25.

LIAM: 25.

ASHLEY: 25.

MATT: Okay, what's the DC? What's your spell DC at the top of your spell sheet?

ASHLEY: Eight plus– Or– No, sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry.

MATT: DC should be–

ASHLEY: 16.

LIAM: That's better.

MATT: 16, okay, one makes its save, the other doesn't.

ASHLEY: Okay.

MATT: So what's the total damage?

LAURA: 25.

ASHLEY: 25.

MATT: Okay, so one takes 25, one takes 13.

ORION: Cool.

TALIESIN: Wow.

MATT: Piercing damage. Got it. And, just, insects appear in the area, doing that much damage. Does that stay? Or does that go away at the end of your turn?

ASHLEY: Let's see here.

MATT: What's the duration?

ASHLEY: Concentration. Up to ten minutes.

MATT: So you can keep it there if you want to.

LAURA: Ooh.

ASHLEY: I'll just keep it.

MATT: It just does damage every turn to everything in that radius.

ASHLEY: Awesome, let's just keep it.

MATT: Okay.

ASHLEY: I'm just really concentrating.

MATT: That ends your turn. Grog, you're up.

TRAVIS: Right, I would like to pull the flaming hammer out of the bag of holding.

LAURA: Yeah.

TRAVIS: And I would like to run at the– this little– this guy.

ORION: No, you'll get in the insect cloud.

TRAVIS: What?

ORION: You'll get in the insect cloud.

MATT: All right. One, two, three, four.

LAURA: Stay away from the insect cloud.

TRAVIS: I forgot there was an insect cloud.

MATT: Five, six, seven, eight. That's as far as you can get, currently.

TRAVIS: Oh, because there are bodies in the way?

MATT: Because of the rough terrain, and you have to jump over the bodies to get there.

LAURA: Wait, but my natural ability–

TRAVIS: Then if that's as far as I can get, I would like to take the hooded lantern I have out of the bag of holding and throw it–

LAURA: Difficult terrain does not slow my group's travel when this is my favored terrain.

MARISHA: Ooh!

(all cheer)

TRAVIS: Yes!

MATT: Nice one. Boom, boom, boom. So you just go charging up overtop the ogre bodies, leaping, coming down with the– hammer, you said?

TRAVIS: Yes, with the flaming hammer.

LIAM: Oh man, you the real MVP.

TRAVIS: – activating the flaming properties of rage, and urine, and death.

MATT: Okay.

TALIESIN: Flame on.

(all laugh)

ORION: Rage, urine, and death.

LIAM: Wow.

LAURA: Don't get touched by it. Don't let it touch you.

TRAVIS: We'll see.

ASHLEY: Don't let it touch you.

LIAM: Work those rules.

MATT: Go for it. So go ahead and roll for attack. You have three attacks with this, at–

MARISHA: Rage, urine, and death.

MATT: Are you frenzying or regular rage?

TRAVIS: Raging, raging, rage. Just regular rage.

MATT: Okay, so you get two attacks.

TRAVIS: Yeah. 19.

MATT: 19 hits.

TRAVIS: And 12.

MATT: 12 also hits.

(all cheer)

TRAVIS: Awesome. And this is a 1d–

MATT: And damage, are you using it two-handed?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MATT: 1d10 damage.

TRAVIS: 1d10.

MATT: Plus whatever the fire damage is on the weapon.

TRAVIS: That can't be right.

MATT: What did you roll?

MARISHA: What? What the dice rolled?

TRAVIS: 1d10? Is this the right dice?

TALIESIN: If you rolled zero, you rolled a ten.

LAURA: If it's a zero, it's a ten.

MARISHA: Yeah.

TRAVIS: It's a 30.

LAURA: Oh, that's a three. He rolled the–

MATT: Yeah.

TRAVIS: I was like, 30!

MATT: So, three plus your proficiency modifier, which is four.

TRAVIS: Yeah. Seven.

MATT: No, this is for damage, so the damage would be plus your strength modifier.

TRAVIS: Oh, four.

MATT: Yeah, so four still. So seven.

TRAVIS: And plus seven for rage.

MATT: Plus two for rage.

TRAVIS: Plus two for rage.

MATT: Yeah, so whatever the bonus is to your greataxe–

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MATT: What's that?

TRAVIS: Oh, it's– to the greataxe is seven when I'm raging.

MATT: So then ten points of damage, then roll the fire damage as well.

TRAVIS: Okay.

LIAM: How is he keeping all of this in his mind? It's like a computer in his brain.

LAURA: I know.

TRAVIS: Is that a 1d10 also? 1d10?

MATT: It should say on the actual magical item.

TRAVIS: Yep, yep. 1d6.

MATT: So 1d6 additional fire damage.

TRAVIS: Five.

MATT: All right, so 15 points of damage total from the first strike. Go ahead and roll damage from the second one.

TRAVIS: Oh, Jesus. Seven.

MATT: So 14, plus an additional 1d6.

LIAM: Grog, math hard.

TRAVIS: Three.

MATT: All right, cool. All right, so as you come running over, leaping in the air, over the ogre bodies, you then slam the hammer once in the side, the fire catching on the metal, on the black iron as it streaks through the air, lighting up the cavern around you.

LAURA: Yeah!

MATT: You guys see this, like, red arc, as Grog comes slamming down into the ooze.

ORION: Fire hammer!

MATT: First one, it hits, boom, smacks, the flames ignite, and the impact, you see it kind of freaks out and quivers backwards, screeching sound. As it does, there's a splash of the black ichor that hits your shoulders–

LAURA: (gasps) No!

MATT: – and you feel it burn and bite into your torso. You take ten points of acid damage.

TRAVIS: Oh, shit.

LAURA: Acid.

ASHLEY: Acid.

MATT: You reach back, not even thinking in the frenzy in your brain, you feel like, just seeing blood and red in your eyes, as you slam down your second strike.

ASHLEY: Grog is gonna start tripping.

MATT: You feel the second impact. Once again, you feel the spray of black across your body. You take an additional ten points of acid damage.

TRAVIS: Up close sucks.

LIAM: That's nothing for Grog, that's nothing.

ASHLEY: Nothing, nothing.

MARISHA: Nothing, he likes it, feels good.

TRAVIS: I'm pretty low.

MATT: That ends Grog's turn.

LAURA: You're low? On health? Have you not healed at all?

LIAM: No, we stayed up and kept watch.

MARISHA: Just helped with that itch you couldn't scratch.

LAURA: Jeez Louise.

TRAVIS: No, I'm fine.

MATT: On this turn, this one pulls out of the lava–

LAURA: No.

MATT: Takes an additional 2d10 from being in at the start of its turn. An additional eight damage, and moves up, both of them flank over to Grog.

TRAVIS: Come to me, woodland creatures.

MATT: Both of them attempting to strike you from each side. As you're flanked, that is a 20 versus armor class.

TRAVIS: That will hit.

MATT: And a 21 versus armor class.

TRAVIS: That'll hit, too.

MARISHA: You're being attacked by jello.

MATT: All right, both of the creatures, they (oozing sound) up next to you. These pseudopods kind of come billowing out, slamming into you with the force of an extremely thick, heavy battering ram. Both hit you for– let's see, here–

TRAVIS: You broke in their glass casket.

MATT: One hits you for 12 points of damage–

LAURA: Oh.

TRAVIS: Okay.

MATT: The other hits you for 14 points of damage.

TRAVIS: Okay.

MATT: Remember, you're raging, so that's halved.

TRAVIS: Oh, halved. Both of those?

MATT: Yeah.

TRAVIS: Awesome.

LIAM: Tank.

ASHLEY: He still has more than me.

MATT: However, both impacts slamming into your body, the leftover sludge begins to eat away and corrode the flesh upon impact. You take from both sides– non-halved, because it is not slashing, bludgeoning, or piercing damage– you take a total of 56 points of acid damage.

TALIESIN: What?

ASHLEY: What?

LAURA: What?

MATT: From both slams.

TRAVIS: That's gross.

LAURA: (gasps) Grog's unconscious.

TRAVIS: No, I'm not.

LAURA: You're not?

LIAM: Double that? Double that, or that?

MATT: No, from both sides. 28 from each.

ASHLEY: How many have you got?

TRAVIS: 14.

LAURA: Oh my god.

TRAVIS: Okay, so little piles of shit have got huevos.

ASHLEY: Wait, and I can't–

MATT: Clarota moves from here, up to here.

LAURA: Clarota, save us!

MARISHA: Really bad jello. It's, like, fridge experiment jello.

TALIESIN: Coffee jello.

MARISHA: Coffee jello?

ASHLEY: Grog!

TRAVIS: That's me, all smart with the fire hammer.

MATT: Hey, it did damage, didn't it?

TRAVIS: It certainly did something.

MATT: It certainly did something Clarota is going to move forward and is going to attempt a– It's kind of close– He is going to attempt a Lightning Bolt against this guy here.

MARISHA: No.

LAURA: Don't do a Lightning Bolt! What? Why would Clarota use a Lightning Bolt when he saw that the lightning did not work for me?

MATT: Clarota did not see.

LAURA: Ugh.

MARISHA: Clarota didn't see? Where was Clarota?

MATT: Way back here.

LIAM: He has to look. He was hanging back.

LAURA: Clarota is trying to screw with us.

MARISHA: Why was he trailing? What the fuck?

LIAM: Nah, he was hanging back.

MARISHA: He's a slacker.

LIAM: He's weak.

MARISHA: He's a fucking slacker.

ORION: That's right, he's weak.

LIAM: He's got this, but he doesn't have this. He's weak, he's hanging back.

MARISHA: All right.

LIAM: What is the deal with the mind flayer?

MATT: I would recommend not arguing with the DM.

ORION: Right.

TRAVIS: Yeah, right.

MARISHA: I'm not arguing with the DM, I'm calling Clarota a slacker.

MATT: Clarota, as it released the bolt of energy, it streaks past, through the air. It arcs into the side of the entity, which then absorbs it. Clarota's eyes go wide for a second. Nervous, it looks at its hands, and puts them back underneath its robe. As it does–

LAURA: Fudge!

MARISHA: Damn it, Clarota.

MATT: The entity divides once again.

LAURA: God! Darn it.

MATT: Into two more–

LAURA: What is that?

TRAVIS: Oh, shit.

LAURA: What is happening?

TRAVIS: Balls.

TALIESIN: Oh, god.

MATT: That ends its turn. At this point in time, now the loud ruckus has been glaring through this tunnel–

LIAM: Shit.

MATT: You hear (clicking sound).

LIAM: Shit.

TRAVIS: Ah, not an umber hulk.

LAURA: Is it another one of those–

MATT: A pair of clacking sounds. And you, as soon as you look up at the ceiling and you see two large creatures clinging to the ceiling, scurrying across with these strange hooked hands, before both immediately leap down from the ceiling.

TRAVIS: We're in big trouble.

TALIESIN: Jesus Christ.

LIAM: Oh, man.

LAURA: Are you freaking kidding me?

MARISHA: What are those? What is that?

LAURA: He's trying to kill us.

ORION: Oh.

LAURA: What is this?

MATT: These two large, armored, beak-faced subterranean creatures with shells on their backs and giant hooked arms leap down from the ceiling.

LAURA: We're gonna die.

MATT: One is going to attempt to strike with both of its hook attacks at Pike.

LAURA: Pike isn't here!

MATT: This is one is moving over Tiberius.

LIAM: Oh, Tiberius, our soft, vulnerable spot.

ORION: What are you talking about?

MATT: So, against Pike, that is 21.

LAURA: Hits.

TRAVIS: Hits.

MATT: And 13.

TRAVIS: Misses.

LAURA: Misses.

MATT: All right, you take 11 points of piercing damage.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: Wherever she is. And the other one misses, clanging against the armor. The hook scrapes across metal, leaving this extremely loud sound. The other one goes twice against Tiberius. That is a 16.

ORION: A 17.

MATT: And a nine. Both miss. Barely getting out of the way. This giant, large, armored creature.

ASHLEY: Falling from the ceiling.

MATT: Right there, take a look– All right, that ends that, so top of the round. Tiberius, you're up.

ORION: Oh, I look at him with a funky grin.

MATT: All right.

ORION: It's a funky one. How much does he weigh? 800 pounds?

MATT: Pretty heavy. Say probably close to 500-600 pounds.

ORION: Ah, beautiful. I cast Telekinesis and I hurl him over my head and chuck him at the other one. I want to get him away from Pike. I don't think I can throw him that far. How far away is he from the lava, actually?

MATT: It's about right there. It's about 35 feet.

ASHLEY: I'm okay. I have a lot of armor.

LAURA: She's good.

ORION: Then I'll try that instead. I'll try to slam dunk.

MATT: He makes a saving throw. That fails entirely. So the creature in front of you lifts up in the air, and starts flailing about with its hooks, trying to find some purchase in the ceiling. You toss it over, and it lands squarely into the pool of lava in the center of the tunnel. You hear screeching in pain as it begins trying to find his way out. Okay.

LIAM: Yes! Yes!

MARISHA: I like lava pools. I like lava pools.

MATT: As it's fully submerged, all right, that is 45 points of fire damage on it immediately as it's slowly sinking into the pool of lava.

TRAVIS: He starts sinking into the pool of lava?

ASHLEY: Whoa.

MATT: Tiberius just Telekinesis-ed him up in the air, and threw it into the lava pool.

TRAVIS: Yes.

LAURA: Good job.

ORION: I use two sorcerer points, and with the other one I do Glacial Blast at the other guy.

MATT: The other one there? Okay. Go ahead and roll– Add your–

LAURA: Damn, Tiberius is getting really freaking cool. Badass.

ORION: Spell attack, right?

MATT: Yeah.

ORION: 13 plus two. 15.

MATT: 15? Right now, because of the level of darkness in the room, and because of its distance from you– You just managed to fire, just out of the range of the creature. It hits the wall behind him, leaving the slick of ice across the stone wall behind it, but unfortunately not the actual creature.

ORION: Okay. Okay. Oh! Right behind it? Do I see myself missing too? Fine. As I'm missing I'll form it into a spike at the end where the walls hit.

MATT: Okay!

TRAVIS: Yeah!

MATT: There is now an ice spike jutting out of the wall right there. All right, that ends your turn, unless you want to move. Still got your move action.

LAURA: Ooh. Nice!

ORION: I'm going to– where's the– that way.

MATT: This way.

ORION: Out the hell– with the stuff– yes.

MATT: Now it would be the ogres, but they're all dead.

(all cheer)

MATT: Scanlan's up.

TRAVIS: Yeah, come on, Scanlan!

MATT: Sees Pike in great danger. Sings a quick little ditty to go ahead and give an inspiration dice to Pike. So you get a d8.

ASHLEY: Okay.

MATT: To help you with any sort of attack rolls, any saving throws, ability checks.

ASHLEY: How about for healing? Does it help with healing? Can I add it to anything?

MATT: Just attack rolls, saving throws, and checks.

ASHLEY: Okay.

MATT: Scanlan is going to attempt to dominate the monster using his Dominate Creature spell. Saving throw. It does not make it. The creature that was harrowing Pike suddenly drops its claws for a second, turns away from you, and starts looking back towards the oozes and Grog. That brings us to Vex. You're up.

LAURA: Okay. Do I have line-of-sight on the other ooze that's attacking Grog? The big one?

MATT: The big one over here? You do. It's dark, and you have no light source currently, so you can try a shot, but it's going to be at disadvantage.

LAURA: Okay, then I guess I should just–

LIAM: Half-elves see in dim light up to 60 feet. Does that pool of lava give anything?

MATT: It gives a very dull glow to the room. It's enough where you can see there is something there. You can even take a shot as opposed to not having any chance.

LAURA: What about the little ooze? One of the little oozes?

MATT: Same possibility because you're currently blocked by this creature that's currently sinking into the lava.

LAURA: I guess I should attack the one that's in the lava.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Okay. Well. Oh! Can I– Is he within ten or five feet of the other, the little ooze?

MATT: No, he's ten feet from it.

LAURA: Okay, then I'll just attack him with my– I'll just attack him.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: This is lame, that's a lame–

TRAVIS: Do it!

MATT: So you have two attacks.

LIAM: Oh.

LAURA: Oh right, two attacks. 13?

MATT: 13 misses, unfortunately.

LAURA: Pathetic. 20-something.

MATT: That hits. So the first one, you fire towards it, except the arrow just (whoosh) into the lava and (puff).

LAURA: All right, cool.

MATT: With a slight puff of smoke.

LAURA: Can I have used my flaming bowstring on the second one?

MATT: On the second one? If you'd like to.

LAURA: Sweet. Oh! And I Hunter's Marked him, because I can do that.

MATT: All right, so you moved the Hunter's Mark over, he is now your quarry.

LAURA: 13.

MATT: Go ahead and roll the additional fire damage and your quarry damage.

LAURA: 13. 19 and 22 damage.

MATT: 22 damage, all righty. The one arrow disappears. The second one, as you release it from the bowstring, you feel the slight tingle of the arcane energy released into the arrow. The arrow bursts into flame as it releases from your bow, streaking and piercing the front of its hide as it's trying to claw its way out.

ORION: Nice!

MATT: Both of its claws are at the edges of the lava, and it's pulling itself, screeching, its mouth and eyes wild with the severe pain it's feeling as it's slowly melting him from the bottom. The arrow (impact sound) into its shoulder and burst into flame. It's now freaking out. It looks like it's having a really, really rough time making its way out.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: Do you want to move, or you going to stay where you are?

LAURA: I'm gonna back up and get against the wall. Oh wait, that's me!

MATT: That's you there.

LAURA: Oh, I was thinking I was Keyleth, I'm gonna come up next to Keyleth.

MATT: All right, so right there?

LAURA: No, against the wall.

MATT: All right, there?

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: All right. That ends your turn. Vax, you're up.

LIAM: Okay, I'm gonna run over the dude in the lava, I'm gonna jump on him, probably make an acrobatics check and land right around here, between the two little slimes.

MATT: Acrobatics check.

LIAM: Yeah.

LAURA: Don't let the slimes hit you.

MARISHA: Vault the lava.

LIAM: It's acrobatics. 22.

MARISHA: Vault that lava.

MATT: You jump, impact, and barely land next to them.

LAURA: Oh my gosh.

LIAM: Now, because they are, because Grog is–

MATT: It does get one swipe of attack of opportunity on you as you pass by.

LIAM: Fine.

MATT: That is going to be a 20.

LIAM: Okay. It's fine.

MATT: So, as you leap off of it, its hook swipes up towards you. You go ahead and take 14 points of piercing damage.

LAURA: That's a big hit!

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: Okay. Okay and since I land, since Grog is right up against those two–

MATT: I will eat this later.

LIAM: I can Sneak Attack one or both of them, so I'm gonna hit the one closest to the party first.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: This is Sneak Attack.

MATT: All righty.

LIAM: This is, this is– It's an 18.

MATT: All right, that hits.

LIAM: Three plus seven is– this is my flametongue dagger, so that's– Oh, hold on, no, I don't know what it is yet. Where's my pencil? I'm sending my dice everywhere. Nine plus six, ten, 15, 18, 40. 58 on one slime.

MATT: What is the piercing damage from the dagger?

LIAM: The piercing damage?

MATT: Daggers are piercing, so yeah.

LIAM: So I don't know. What is that? Is that what's besides the Sneak Attack damage?

MATT: Thank you kindly. Mysterious appearance of paper towels.

LIAM: That's 18. If it's doubled for the Sneak Attack? I don't know. It's nine, without a Sneak Attack. 18 if it's Sneak Attack.

MATT: Right. Well, it's a Sneak Attack, because it is flanking.

LIAM: So 18 for Sneak Attack.

MATT: Okay, got you. Cool.

LIAM: That's first dagger.

MATT: All right, so second dagger. Go ahead and–

LIAM: Second dagger attacks the other one. I just turn around and sink down into the other one for 16 with the keen, yeah, 16 with the keen dagger.

MATT: That hits, go ahead and roll damage.

LIAM: Okay, and this is probably not Sneak Attack at this point, or is it? I don't know.

MATT: No, you'll do only one Sneak Attack per round.

LIAM: Okay, eight.

MATT: Eight, gotcha. So as you rush, you leap off, take the scratch in the air from the hook horror creature. You land on the ground, slash one with your dagger, slash the other. Both slashes are almost simultaneous. As you hit, you feel your blades gain purchase in both creatures, and you look down at your arms as the horrible burning sensation filters onto your hands as the splash-back. You take a total of 20 points of acid damage from the melee attacks you took against the creatures.

LIAM: 20, you said?

MATT: 20 total, yes.

LAURA: (whispers) Oh my god.

LIAM: Okay. All right.

MATT: All right. That brings us to Percy.

ASHLEY: You're at 24? Fuck.

LIAM: It's all right.

TALIESIN: Where's the laser?

MARISHA: So they're all still alive, all the oozes are still alive.

TALIESIN: Laser.

MARISHA: It was around here somewhere. You had it last.

TRAVIS: What are you looking for?

LAURA: What? What's happening?

TALIESIN: Oh, never mind.

MARISHA: Did I have it? Oh, wait, wait, wait, wait.

TALIESIN: Yeah you had it, aha!

MATT: Percy, what you got?

TALIESIN: I wanna move just slightly to my right. Just over there so I can get a clear shot at the oozes.

MATT: Okay, so right there?

TALIESIN: Yeah, about right there, so I'm not going to hit anybody.

MATT: Okay.

TALIESIN: I'm gonna take two shots at the little oozes. At the–

MATT: This one here?

TALIESIN: Yeah, that right little ooze.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: Little ooze.

TALIESIN: First shot. 27 to hit. And that does ten points of damage. And then I'm gonna take another shot at him, I'm going to take a fire shot. And I'm gonna take a negative five to hit. And that's 14.

MATT: Hits.

TALIESIN: So that's 15 plus– that's 23 points of damage plus three points of fire damage.

MATT: 26, nice.

TRAVIS: Yeah, boy. Perce!

MARISHA: On the little ooze?

ASHLEY: 26 points of damage?

LAURA: Woot woot!

TRAVIS: Wow!

TALIESIN: Plus fire.

LAURA: Plus fire.

TRAVIS: Get on it, nasty.

LIAM: Pow, pow, pow, pow.

MATT: All right, that brings us to Keyleth.

MARISHA: All the oozes are still alive?

MATT: Yeah.

MARISHA: Damn oozes. All right. I'm gonna do something crafty.

TRAVIS: Yeah!

ASHLEY: Get it!

MATT: Gotta eat sometime, guys.

MARISHA: I'm gonna bamf into an eagle.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: I'm gonna fly over– I think I'm going to land right by here.

MATT: There?

MARISHA: Uh-huh.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: And I'm gonna do Thunder Wave. Which is–

MATT: So you're coming out of eagle form?

MARISHA: So I'm coming out of eagle form. I was just using the eagle to fly.

MATT: Okay, okay.

MARISHA: Coming out of eagle form, and I'm gonna do my thunderpush. So I take my staff and I throw it down. Kerplash.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MARISHA: Today it's kerplash.

TRAVIS: I buy kerplash.

MARISHA: Kerplash!

TALIESIN: Okay.

MATT: All right! So what is the radius effect on that?

MARISHA: It's a 15-foot cube and it pushes everything ten feet away from me. Directly away.

MATT: 15-foot cube, okay. So like this cube here?

MARISHA: Sure. Yeah, a cube in front of me.

MATT: All right, cool. So, they both get saving throws.

MARISHA: Not Grog, though. I'm gonna just–

MATT: You can do that. Okay, neither makes their saving throw. So go ahead and roll damage, or whatever it does.

MARISHA: 2d8.

MATT: 2d8 to each. What is the damage type on that?

MARISHA: Six. It just says damage and then they're pushed. I was–

MATT: Okay. So I'll go ahead and say it's thunder damage. All right, so they're pushed how long? Ten feet?

MARISHA: Ten feet. Directly away from me.

MATT: Yeah. So they're pushed right there. Got it.

MARISHA: I was hoping they would go into the lava.

MATT: Unfortunately, it's not far enough. Is that your turn?

MARISHA: Yep!

MATT: All right. Pike!

ASHLEY: Okay, can I sprinter's boot over to Grog? Sorry, no glasses, guys. So I don't see where I am.

TRAVIS: A boot?

MATT: You can, yes.

ASHLEY: Okay, so I'm going to Cure Wounds.

MATT: All right.

ASHLEY: 'Cause that's what I do.

MATT: It's what you do as a healer, yo.

ASHLEY: So let's see, 1d8 plus spell damage. Wait, so I'm gonna do it at fourth level, so that means I can roll how many times?

MATT: 4d8.

ASHLEY: Okay, so–

MATT: Plus five.

ASHLEY: Five, eight, 16.

LAURA: Ooh! That's good! 24?

ASHLEY: 24. So you heal 24.

TRAVIS: Thank you!

MATT: Nice.

ASHLEY: And then–

LAURA: Plus, do you add that to anything?

ASHLEY: Well, he adds it to his 14 that he already has.

MATT: Sorry.

ASHLEY: And then, can I do anything else while I'm there?

MATT: No, bonus action to do the item, move, action to cast the spell.

ORION: No.

ASHLEY: Okay.

MATT: So that's your turn.

ASHLEY: Okay.

MATT: Well done. All right, that brings us to Grog.

TRAVIS: Right, yeah. I would like to come out of my rage.

MATT: All right. So it's level two exhaustion.

TRAVIS: For the first time ever.

LAURA: Ever.

LIAM: Wow. Not sure how I feel about that.

TRAVIS: What do you– where do you wanna go? Towards Keyleth or toward the– Okay. I'd like to pick up Pike and run balls over this way.

MATT: Okay.

TRAVIS: Right towards this area.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: I'm all on my own.

TRAVIS: Well, yeah, look. It nearly killed me the one time I hit it.

ORION: You shouldn't be doing melee on things that can split in half to begin with.

LAURA: We're gonna die.

MATT: All right, so you pick up Pike. Level two exhaustion, your speed is halved.

LAURA: Oh no.

TRAVIS: Okay.

MATT: So you can only move 20 feet.

TRAVIS: Right.

ORION: You messed everything up.

LIAM: Hey man, if I can't be a hero here, where am I gonna do it?

ORION: Oh, every other time is fine.

TRAVIS: Do you want to stay? It doesn't really matter.

MATT: You grab her, you turn–

TRAVIS: You want to stay over there?

MATT: – run that way?

TRAVIS: You know what? I'll–

MARISHA: Aim for in front of the Scientology Center. It always goes over really well.

TRAVIS: Do you just wanna stay?

ASHLEY: I'm gonna– I'll stay, I'll stay.

TRAVIS: I'll leave Pike where she is and I'll run up and flank Iceberg Lobsterface.

MATT: Right there?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MATT: Okay, so, that's as far as you can get, unfortunately–

TRAVIS: Okay.

MATT: – 'cause you're double-fatigued.

TALIESIN: My name in high school.

MATT: As you run past, both of those slimes–

ASHLEY: Double?

MARISHA: Double-fatigue?

TALIESIN: Iceberg Lobsterface.

MATT: – flash out with pseudopods, as reactions.

LIAM: I'm surrounded by shit.

TALIESIN: It's what all the kids called me.

MATT: So, two attacks against you.

TALIESIN: Long story.

MATT: That's a 22.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

ASHLEY: Fuck!

MATT: And a 19.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MATT: All right, so both slam you for 24 points of bludgeoning damage. You're not raged, so it's not halved.

TRAVIS: Okay.

LAURA: Ugh.

MATT: So 24 against you, with an additional 56 points of acid damage.

ASHLEY: Wait! What?

TRAVIS: Unconscious!

TALIESIN: Damn it.

LAURA: Why didn't you get acid damage?

MARISHA: Son of a bitch.

MATT: They haven't hit him yet. That was just Grog running away.

LAURA: Oh.

MATT: Both of them getting attacks of opportunity on him, and both hitting.

LIAM: I am surrounded by shit.

ASHLEY: Guys, guys, guys.

MATT: Grog falls face-first, right next– right, like, literally cradling– His unconscious body is cradling the two dead ogres right now.

LAURA: No!

MATT: This slight sound of 'sss' as the acid is, like, sizzling and scarring his flesh.

LAURA: Nobody attack the things up close!

MATT: That brings us to their turn.

LAURA: Oh, no!

LIAM: I'm going unconscious here, kids.

LAURA: All of our heavy hitters are dead.

MATT: These three oozes turn. Actually, this one's going to move here–

ASHLEY: Oh, hello!

MATT: – towards Pike.

LIAM: (Tommy Wiseau voice) Oh, hi, Pike.

(all laugh)

MATT: You get an attack of opportunity on it, if you like–

LAURA: Oh, hit it!

LIAM: Hit it? Yeah.

MATT: – as it slips away.

LAURA: Get it!

TALIESIN: Get it!

LIAM: Do I have to roll to do that? Right?

MATT: Yeah, you still have roll to hit it.

LIAM: 26.

MATT: Hits.

LAURA: Why is it going up there?

ASHLEY: You're gonna kill this thing!

LIAM: 11.

MATT: 11?

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: Points of damage?

LIAM: That's the damage. 11.

MATT: Yeah.

LIAM: Oh, yeah yeah yeah.

MATT: All right, cool.

ASHLEY: What did you guys vote on?

MARISHA: No shit.

LAURA: Did they vote on this?

ASHLEY: Probably.

MATT: So, the one that's attacking you, Pike, that is a–

LAURA: You guys suck.

MATT: – 23, versus armor class.

ASHLEY: Yes, that hits.

(all laugh)

MATT: All right. You take 12 points of bludgeoning damage from the impact of the pseudopod, with an additional 28 points of acid damage.

LIAM: Son of a gun.

MARISHA: Pseudopod?

ASHLEY: Okay, so an additional 28 on top of that.

TRAVIS: You guys are dicks.

MATT: Yeah, so a total of 40 points of damage from the strike.

ASHLEY: I understand.

MARISHA: Did he just call it a 'pseudopod'?

LIAM: Masochists.

MATT: The other two are going to attack you.

LIAM: Sure they are.

MATT: That's going to be a 19 versus armor class.

LIAM: Yeah, that hits 'cause I'm at 19. Right? So that hits if I'm at 19?

MATT: It hits. Yeah. Okay. The other one is a 14, so that misses.

LIAM: Okay, so I use Uncanny Dodge on the one that hit.

MARISHA: Oh!

MATT: All right. So.

TALIESIN: Nice!

LIAM: Whoa!

MARISHA: Yeah you do.

MATT: As you pull that away, you– You take half-damage from the strike?

LIAM: Half-damage. That's right.

MATT: All right, so that's– this was a 40. Take 20 points of damage, total, from the bludgeoning and the acid.

LIAM: Oh, I am rough, kids. I am rough.

LAURA: Plus acid?

MATT: All right. That ends their turn.

LAURA: Oh my god.

MATT: Clarota–

LAURA: Clarota, save us!

MATT: – is going to step forward to there.

LIAM: Use your magic, you strange flayer, you.

LAURA: Do not use Lightning Bolt.

MARISHA: Yeah. No Lightning Bolt, Clarota.

MATT: Clarota reaches forward, uses his own– Taking a note from Tiberius, uses his Telekinesis spell. The arcanist marks on its body flare up, and as it does you can see this large creature–

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: – gets lifted up, and slams on top of this hook horror–

ORION: Yes!

LIAM: That's awesome.

MATT: – pushing it further into the lava and doing additional acid damage to the hook horror, which–

LAURA: Yeah! And it dies?

ORION: Damn hook whores!

LIAM: (Cosby voice) You see–

MATT: – which completely dissolves and melts the hook horror.

(all cheer)

TRAVIS: All right, Clarence!

MATT: As it pushes down, the ooze just touches the edge of the lava, not taking full damage from the impact, but just enough from the portion of it.

LIAM: (Jimmy Stewart voice) Clarence! Clarence!

MATT: Taking an additional five points of fire damage. All right, it's that one there. Great. All right, that brings us to the hook horror's turn, who is currently dominated by Scanlan. Is going to rush forward to the edge here, and strike twice at the–

LAURA: Yeah, Scanlan!

MATT: – creature in the lava. Both hit.

TRAVIS: Yes!

LAURA: I'm full.

MATT: It's prone. That deals six plus 14. Eight. All right. The hook horror that Scanlan's controlling slams its hooks down into the ooze, causing the ooze to get pushed further into the lava. As you see its form begin to dissipate and slowly disintegrate into the pool of lava.

LAURA: Yeah!

MATT: Leaving this dark, cooled kind of surface element to it. Slowly breaking apart, dissipating over the magma.

ASHLEY: Bye, bitch.

MATT: End of its turn, it's going to try and make a saving throw against the domination effect. Rolls a natural 20. Breaks the effect, however I feel like it did its good for the turn.

LAURA: Damn it. Did he take acid damage? Is he hurt?

MATT: Yeah, he did. He took 20 points of acid damage from each strike.

LAURA: Nice. Good, good, good.

ASHLEY: So there is only one left?

LAURA: No, there is two little oozes and a big one.

LIAM: Two oozes and a monster man.

MATT: All right, that brings us to the top of the turn. Tiberius, you're up.

ORION: Ah very well. I scooch myself a little bit over behind him.

MARISHA: (sings) One little two little three little oozes.

MATT: Over here?

ORION: Yeah, that's good, I can see his fanny from here. I'm going to cast Glacial Blast again, but I'm going to form a giant spike once more and jam it right in his asshole.

LIAM: Oh, he's pulling a Vax.

ORION: And I'm going to try and catapult it right where it's over. Because it's still at the edge of the lava pool, right?

MATT: Mm-hm. So you're going to glacial spike in the– Kancho him. Magically kancho.

ORION: Magic ice kancho blast.

MATT: Arcane cheat code. All right. So go ahead and roll to attack.

LIAM: Up up down down left right left right.

TRAVIS: A B A B N.

ORION: 24.

MATT: That definitely hits. Go ahead and roll damage.

ORION: Yeah. One, two, three, four, six. That is eight. What is that, a 12? 15, 16, 18, 19. 20. 20 damage.

MATT: 20 damage? All right, and he's grappled, correct?

ORION: I'm not trying to grapple him, I'm trying to just push him.

MATT: Push him? Shove?

ORION: Yeah.

LAURA: Into the lava.

ORION: Because he's like swinging at that dude so I'm like up his keister.

MATT: All right. All right. So he does make his saving throw.

ORION: Okay.

MATT: Unfortunately, so it doesn't push him into the lava, but it does slam him and does a shit-ton of damage to him, so.

ORION: Nice.

MARISHA: In his pooper.

MATT: Looking rough. Just a little bit.

ORION: Yeah. I'll spend another two points.

MATT: How many points do you have now?

ORION: After this, I'll have five.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: Because we had the rest, I regenerated all my stuff.

MATT: Right. Right.

ORION: So I spent two already.

TRAVIS: He's making trouble.

ORION: I spent another two on the fight. And I'm going to do another one. Up his ass again.

MATT: All right, go ahead and roll for that.

ORION: Yeah. 20.

MATT: Uh-huh.

MARISHA: Uh-huh.

ORION: Yeah and that is 15. 15 points of damage.

MATT: Makes his saving throw again, unfortunately. It does not push him. Does additional points of damage. He's looking really rough. You can see now, this ice has encrusted around the outside of its armor.

ORION: And his butt.

MATT: And where the wounds from the impact are, there's cracking shards of ice crystal jutting outward.

ORION: From his arsehole.

MATT: From his asshole. Scanlan's turn. Should have had your sheet, Scanlan. Scanlan's going to go ahead and, for the hell of it, run up and make an attack.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Eff him up, Scanlan.

ASHLEY: Let's go, Scanlan.

MATT: Why not? Pulling out, his singing sword arches in the air, and begins humming to it as he walks upon– The humming kind of adds this vibration element, like a tuning fork blade, as he arcs the sword down.

MATT: A natural 18. I'm going to assume that hits. That's going to be a 1d8 longsword damage. That's an eight plus– 12 points of damage.

LAURA: Woo, Scanlan.

TRAVIS and MARISHA: Yeah, Scanlan.

ASHLEY: Go Scanlan.

MATT: The blade swings down to where the ice has encrusted the back of its armored shell. Scanlan takes the blade, swings it down, and pierces it directly into where that ice has gathered. As it does, it cracks open the back of its armored shell. Almost peeling it open like a shrimp. You can now see all its fleshy innards are exposed to the outside. It's looking extremely, extremely close to death. It's screaming in pain, kind of thrashing about now.

LIAM: Shrimping, cool.

MATT: Vex, you're up.

LAURA: Okay. I'm gonna Lightning Bolt the bad guy.

MATT: This guy?

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: Oh wait, no, I should save my brother.

LIAM: Maybe.

LAURA: Okay, I'm going to attack one of the oozies instead.

LIAM: The one right behind me.

LAURA: The one right behind him.

MATT: All right. Go ahead and roll for attack.

LAURA: Yeah. Yeah, 23.

MATT: Very nice, very nice, that hits

LAURA: Oh I Hunter's Mark him first. Bonus.

ORION: Bonus.

LIAM: Excellent.

LAURA: 14 for the first attack.

ASHLEY: Wait, do we still have Scanlan's inspiration song?

MATT: You do, yeah.

LIAM: You do. You have the die.

ASHLEY: I have the die. Is what I'm talking about, sorry.

LAURA: Do I get six on both attacks? I do, don't I?

MATT: Mm-hm.

LAURA: Yeah. 17 on the second attack.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: Kill it. Kill it.

MATT: With a sickening (splat) sound, the ooze splatters across the floor.

LAURA: Yeah.

LIAM: Thank you.

MATT: Leaving a small, sizzling pool that's scarring the rock below it. You can see it slowly depressing into the ground. You gonna stay where you are?

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: All right. That brings us to Vax.

LIAM: All right. I walk back about 15 feet, and I go (shnk-shnk). Throw daggers at it.

MATT: Both daggers?

LIAM: First one's a 15.

MATT: That hits.

LIAM: Okay and that is– this is my keen dagger. That is nine.

MATT: Nine hits.

LIAM: Second dagger. Definitely hits, that's a 26.

MATT: Hits. None of them are Sneak Attack, unfortunately.

LIAM: That's fine. This is flametongue. I don't know if fire helps, but that is an eight. So nine and an eight.

MATT: Nine and an eight, gotcha. Both daggers splash into it. You can see where they would slowly be scarred and damaged.

LIAM: Except that they teleport back to my blink belt.

LAURA: Yay, blink belt.

MATT: As they return to your belt, you can feel there a slight bit of liquid left, and you shake it off quickly.

LIAM: Shite.

LAURA: (sings) Shake it off.

MATT: But no other effect that that. It looks like it's having a hard time keeping its form together. It's kind of shaking and (oozing sound) as it moves. Still running towards Pike.

LIAM: Finish that shit, Pike.

MATT: That brings us to Percy.

LIAM: Hit it.

TALIESIN: All right. I'm just taking the shot. Taking a shot with the bonus. So that's 14 to hit.

MATT: Mm-hm.

TALIESIN: That hits. So that's 18 points of damage.

MATT: All righty.

TALIESIN: And I'm gonna take the other shot.

MATT: Is this against the ooze?

TALIESIN: Yeah, yeah. Sorry, the ooze.

MATT: All right. Yep.

TALIESIN: And that's 13 to hit.

ASHLEY: Grog's unconscious?

LIAM: He'll be fine in ten minutes, Pike.

ASHLEY: What?

LIAM: He's out of the fight, but he'll be fine.

ASHLEY: Oh, okay.

TALIESIN: And that's 11 points of damage.

MATT: The first shot hits, and the ooze kind of quivers. It leaves this kind of gaping hole, and it begins to slowly reform itself. Before it can, you see the other weak spot where the top of its physical form is barely wavering, and it's able to keep corporeal. You aim the second shot, and as you fire, it detonates and that portion of its upper torso– whatever it would be– gets flung off and splats against the wall, the rest of it slowly liquefying as the rest of the slime is destroyed.

ASHLEY: Nice.

TRAVIS: Yeah, buddy.

LAURA: Yeah.

TALIESIN: So I'm going to back up against the wall. I'm going to back to the wall of the– Yeah.

MATT: Okay. Keyleth.

MARISHA: Do I have enough speed to get next to Vex there? 30 feet?

MATT: Vax, you mean? Yeah, you do.

MARISHA: Is that Vax? All right, once again, I'm going to Thorn Whip this bitch.

MATT: All right, go ahead and roll for attack.

LIAM: (sings) Thorn Whip.

MARISHA: 26.

MATT: That hits, definitely, go ahead and roll damage.

LIAM: (sings) Thorn Whip, the bitch is dead.

MARISHA: Eight points of damage.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: And I pull him–

MATT: How do you want to do this?

(all cheer)

MATT: The creature is slashing about with its claws.

MARISHA: So I take my Thorn Whip, and I go (whip sound). And I grab him. And I see he's still struggling. So I take another one and I go (whip sound) on the other one. And I just go Spiderman-style.

MATT: And (dragging sound). As you do it, it plummets face-first into the–

LAURA: Woo!

MATT: – both into the magma and the slightly still-sizzling form left over from the ooze that had melted there.

ORION: Magma and acid.

MARISHA: And just for flavor, I take a big gust of air, a big Wind Burst and I go (whoosh) down into the lava pool. Encrusting it all.

MATT: As you do, it slams down. You hear it scream underneath as its body begins to quiver. The Wind Burst hits, and the cool air rushes through the tunnel. All of your guys' hair and everything gets blown back for a second. You have to cover your eyes, and as you look back–

(all laugh)

MATT: The magma has cooled to a solid rock-covering surface. As darkness falls back into the tunnel–

ORION: Oh, Light!

MATT: As Tiberius hits Light, in the tunnel you can see the–

LAURA: Grog!

MATT: – hook horror, which, a portion of its upper torso is now encrusted into the actual cavern floor.

LAURA: Awesome.

TRAVIS: Amazing.

LAURA: Save Grog!

ASHLEY: I'm going to go over to Grog and Cure Wounds at fourth level.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: You tried to kill us, but you failed.

LAURA: Don't challenge them.

ASHLEY: Don't.

TALIESIN: Nice try.

ASHLEY: Nice job, guys.

TRAVIS: I did a pretty decent job, actually.

MATT: I ate pizza in front of you guys. I don't care. It was tasty. Thank you.

ORION: Yeah.

MARISHA: I don't care. No shame.

MATT: Delicious pizza.

LAURA: No. We're not gonna have Trinket this whole thing. We better get back to Trinket soon. I'm freaking out, you guys.

MARISHA: That's true, if we keep going.

ASHLEY: 25 points of heal!

LIAM: Just in seven more weeks.

TRAVIS: Thank you!

ASHLEY: You're welcome!

MARISHA: I might be able to guide him–

LIAM: Trinket's on the sidelines, man.

LAURA: That makes me so sad!

LIAM: We're not going back.

LAURA: And it's all you guys' fault!

LIAM: But it was like three years, Trinket was by your side. This is the first time ever.

MATT: As Grog, you come to consciousness again–

TRAVIS: Ah! Did I kill it?

LAURA: You did, Grog! Good job!

TALIESIN: Yes, Grog, you killed it good.

LAURA: Also, handful of pizza.

TRAVIS: I put my hand in my pizza!

(all laugh)

LIAM: You killed them all, Grog! You were magnificent!

MARISHA: Yay, Grog!

TRAVIS: Aha! Tell me more! (snores)

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Wait–

MARISHA: Now we pass out.

ASHLEY: – so can I also do a Mass Cure Wounds? Since I just did a–

MATT: Yeah, if you'd like!

ASHLEY: Okay. So I'll also do a Mass Cure Wounds.

LAURA: Yay!

LIAM: Yes, 'cause I'm at four hit points.

ASHLEY: Yeah, you're pretty bad.

MARISHA: Oof.

LAURA: Brother.

TALIESIN: I'm fine.

LIAM: Oh, brother, where art thou?

ORION: I feel fine!

LAURA: I feel fine.

MARISHA: Ah, me too.

TALIESIN: I feel fine.

LIAM: Oh! Oh! Oh! Fancy you! Blah-blah-blah-blah!

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Seems that there's one table where everyone is perfectly reasonable!

ORION: All the time, yes, Vax!

LIAM: I'm at four hit points! You go fuck yourself.

MARISHA: Yes, everyone on this side of the table's good.

ORION: There's an acid guy! Stab.

(all laugh)

LIAM: I was trying to save his ass! I was hurting myself on purpose.

MATT: All right. So, as you guys steel yourselves for a moment, kind of recovering from that fateful encounter, you–

ASHLEY: 22 points of healing–

LAURA: To everyone.

MATT: To everyone.

LIAM: That's pretty good.

MATT: Everyone heals 22 points of damage.

LIAM: That's half-ish.

TALIESIN: I reload.

LAURA: Well done, well done.

LIAM: Half-ish.

ASHLEY: Something additional.

TRAVIS: Thank you, Pike.

ASHLEY: Oh, you're welcome, Grog! My best pal.

TRAVIS: Hell yeah. (growling noises)

ASHLEY: (growling noises)

MATT: All right.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: It's a language we speak.

ASHLEY: Yeah, man, it's like our own thing.

(all laugh)

MATT: You guys push forward down the tunnel–

LAURA: Oh!

LIAM: Yes.

LAURA: Limping.

MATT: For another 20 or so minutes, bringing yourself along, sore from the impact of the battle.

LIAM: I'm burnt.

MATT: Bits of your armor scarred. By the way, your armor–

LIAM: Yes.

MATT: – what type of armor was it?

LIAM: It was– it's magical. I found it in the goblin city. Studded leather armor, plus two.

MATT: All right. For the acidic nature of this–

LIAM: Wait. Do you know what's funny? What's funny is, the armor I had before this, that I wasn't paying attention to, was acid resistant! Isn't that funny?

MARISHA: And now you don't have it no more?

LIAM: That's so funny!

LAURA: That's great!

MATT: Look at that!

TRAVIS: That's really funny. Keep going.

MARISHA: That is funny.

LIAM: It's in my bag!

MATT: You wipe it off. Thankfully, the magic enchantment protects the armor entirely.

LAURA: Ah! See! That was acid-resistant, too!

MATT: Grog, what armor do you have?

LIAM: Even better!

TRAVIS: Oh, it's like hides and leathers and–

MATT: Just regular hide.

TRAVIS: Yep.

MATT: Currently, as you're walking, you look down and notice that the armor on your torso has near-completely dissolved.

LAURA: (gasps)

TRAVIS: Son of a– Well, you're welcome, ladies!

LAURA: My, my, Grog!

TRAVIS: (sings) It's time for a show!

ORION: Grog! Will you put those away!

MATT: As it stands, you have no additional armor class bonus for any armor.

LAURA: Oh no!

MATT: Your hide armor is gone. It is completely dissolved.

LAURA: What about the black armor? Put on the dwarven black plate armor!

TRAVIS: They're dwarves.

ASHLEY: What if we melt it and then make it a big one?

LAURA: If it's magical, it might fit you if you just try it on!

ASHLEY: I don't know, would that work?

ORION: It's true!

LIAM: Hold on, hold on. DM! DM. I take off my magical armor, which was dwarven in shape before–

LAURA: (gasps) Oh, good!

LIAM: – but I take it off, it shrinks down to like a little toddler–

LAURA: Oh! Ew. Cover yourself, Vax!

LIAM: I'm wearing, like, a Scientology unibody underwear underneath–

(all laugh)

LAURA: Oh, okay.

ASHLEY: Wouldn't that be– that's mormons!

LIAM: The armor shrinks down to like toddler-size–

ORION: I don't know what that means!

LIAM: – and I hand it to Grog.

TALIESIN: It's probably for the best.

LIAM: And I go to my pack and I take out my old armor, which is acid resistant. Not quite as cool as what I was wearing, but I don't want him–

TRAVIS: You had two pairs of gloves?

LIAM: I can't– huh?

TRAVIS: Kidding. It's Dumb & Dumber.

LIAM: I can't stare at his pecs for the next three days, so I'll give him my armor.

LAURA: I can.

LIAM: Ooh! And put on what I had on before.

MATT: All right. So you take a moment, and hand him new armor, and Grog, this scarred, nearly naked goliath form, has been lumbering through this hallway–

TRAVIS: Ooh!

MATT: Hoo! Modesty, Grog!

(all laugh)

MATT: You place the studded leather on–

LIAM: Studded leather armor plus two, okay?

MATT: So mark that for your AC.

TRAVIS: Studded armor leather plus two.

ASHLEY: Wait, but then what are–

LAURA: He's got his own armor.

LIAM: I've got my old armor. I found that armor down here.

TALIESIN: I'm gonna be the person who actually examines the cart, at this point.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: Oh! That's a good idea.

LAURA: Plus we have other plate armor!

LIAM: That's a loaner.

TALIESIN: You know, I just figured someone ought to.

MARISHA: What the fuck did we open?

TRAVIS: Plus two to AC?

LAURA: Yeah.

TALIESIN: And it should be me.

MARISHA: Yeah.

LIAM: No, it's more complicated than that.

MATT: Okay, here's the circumstance for you, real fast, before we get to that. So, Grog.

TRAVIS: Yep.

MATT: The armor you had on was hide, which was a dex bonus of 12 plus your dex. Studded leather is also the same, so your AC actually goes up.

TRAVIS: Oh! Ho! Something that you'd think!

MATT: So, what was your AC previously?

TRAVIS: 18?

MATT: 18?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MATT: It should now be 20.

TRAVIS: Yay! Yes!

LAURA: Yay, Grog!

TRAVIS: Grog takes the top off and does a–

LIAM: Loaner! Loaner.

TALIESIN: Put it back on.

LIAM: Loaner.

LAURA: It's his, he's keeping it. It's going to stink like Grog, you won't want that back.

TRAVIS: The things I'm gonna do in this armor, you're not going to want it back. Just give me and Scanlan one night to break it in, and I promise you, it will be mine.

MATT: Just the two of you?

TRAVIS: Well, uh, you know what I mean. Who am I talking to?

MATT: All right, well, go ahead and roll an investigation check.

TALIESIN: An investigation check, what is that? Eight.

MATT: Okay. Looking at the cart, the cart is a rickety wooden thing, but what was in the cart was a large glass unit, a containment unit that was sealed off. You can see the inside of it has slight scarring to the glass, but it seems to be resistant to whatever the loose creature was contained in it. Along the inside of the cart, you notice there are a couple of just left over chunks of flesh of different colors, patches or pieces you see, like part of a hand that's just in there.

LAURA: Ew.

MATT: Partially decomposed, to a certain extent. It looks like these were either used to feed whatever the creature was in there or remnants of some other strange collection. Based on the best you guys can ascertain, this creature was part of the experimentation-type process that the weird naga creature you fought earlier came from.

LAURA: Oh, great, so there could be more.

TRAVIS: Did we search the ogres?

LAURA: Yeah! Loot the ogres!

MATT: Ogres are wearing nasty, nasty, tattered at this point, hide armor

LIAM: Grog could do it.

MATT: They both carry total, amongst the two of them, about 24 pieces of gold.

LAURA: Sweet.

TRAVIS: I wanna take it.

LAURA: I add it to party funds.

TRAVIS: I am searching the ogres, and I keep the 24 gold, but I give two to Vax.

LIAM: Thank you.

TRAVIS: You're welcome.

MARISHA: Can I go and grab shards of the broken glass of the case?

MATT: If you'd like to, yeah. So mark that in your inventory, you have some hand-sized shards of broken glass.

TRAVIS: And two to Pike for healing me.

ASHLEY: Oh, thanks.

MATT: Anything else you guys wish to do in this section?

LIAM: So we searched the ogres, that's it. I guess we should just start walking further down.

TRAVIS: You take a poo on the black puddle of acid?

TALIESIN: I think– Well, no. That's the only heat source, that's the only lava there was, and now it's cool.

MATT: And now it has cooled, yeah.

TALIESIN: Okay, never mind, then.

MARISHA: Sorry.

TALIESIN: It's all right, I think it's worth it.

TRAVIS: I'd like to take a hit dice.

MATT: Okay. Go ahead and do that. As many as you'd like.

LIAM: Let's rest for a half-hour or so.

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: Take a moment, you can spend any hit dice now that you need to heal yourself. Just make sure to mark how many you've used.

TALIESIN: I just hear the sounds of ones.

MATT: All right. As you guys take a moment to heal yourselves, you pull yourselves back up to your feet, and you tread further down this tunnel. Another 25-30 minutes of the slight curvature, and it gets steeper and steeper, until eventually it opens up into a familiar cavern to some of you. You see a large waterfall pouring down from above–

ASHLEY: (gasps)

LAURA: Mother bitches.

MARISHA: It looped around?

MATT: You are on the outskirts of where the next tunnel opens up, where there are a few small streams of lava pouring from the ceiling. You look above, and you can see the top of the downward cavern. There's the giant lake beneath. And across the way, you can see the waterfall where Clarota was originally discovered.

MARISHA: Well, we should go pick up Trinket.

TALIESIN: At least you get your bear.

LAURA: (gasps) Trinket!

MARISHA: Let's go pick up Trinket.

LAURA: Oh yeah yeah yeah yeah.

TRAVIS: You're going to get your bear killed.

LIAM: Can you explain? I don't think I understand.

MARISHA: We left Trinket over there.

LIAM: Can you explain with your map, Matt?

MATT: Yes.

MARISHA: We're at the bottom of the cave.

ORION: We went down and just–

LIAM: I get we doubled back, but it would help the visual, I think.

MATT: Yeah so– and I'll have more of this for you guys next week.

TRAVIS: It was a warp tube.

MATT: The path you guys took was essentially– lead to this back area, which I'll draw for next week, and a tunnel that curved all the way around and exited right there.

LAURA: So we're–

LIAM: All right, we'll go get your bear.

LAURA: We'll go get Trinket, and then we'll go down the path we should have gone down in the first place next week.

MARISHA: Son of a bitch.

TALIESIN: Except we get Trinket.

LAURA: But Trinket!

MARISHA: So it's not useless.

LAURA: It was absolutely useless.

LIAM: That's fate, that's kismet.

MARISHA: Is there, like, any other way down here?

MATT: Other than the fact you've completely destroyed one of the mind flayer generals as well as the one helming the war camp above. You've acquired new magical items and defeated one of the abominations that was created for the siege war. I think you accomplished quite a few things, though maybe not as directly as you were hoping.

TALIESIN: And we acquired our bear.

LAURA: We got our bear back.

MATT: All right, so you, taking the flying carpet, it's a very precarious journey as the weight limit for the carpet–

LIAM: You go on it, right?

LAURA: He's with me, and he cast Featherfall.

MATT: You can go ahead and cast Fly on your bear. Trinket awkwardly (bear noises) manages to swim her way down to the bottom floor.

LAURA: Come, Trinket, come.

MATT: As you make your way to the base of the watery lake, at the bottom, you can see a swish to the water, and a very familiar sight briefly shows itself in the distance. As you see a slick domed fish-like head protrude with a few tentacles in the distance, you all instinctively step quite a distance away, and it seems to withdraw back into the water.

MARISHA: Can I– While I see it real quick, I'm going to go ahead and channel and cast Beast Sense through it.

MATT: Nothing bestial of it. This is not a natural creature.

MARISHA: Good to know.

MATT: Clarota once again whispers to the rest of you, “Stay at bay. The Aboleth is dangerous.”

LAURA: Aboleth?

MARISHA: Aboleth.

MATT: You all step back and turn now into the tunnel that extends further into the heart of this mountain. You see streams of lava pouring from the top occasionally, and one central flow of molten rock tends to fill half of the cavern, like a small river heading down into the base of the mountain. This is very familiar to you, as it's the path that your dream took you.

ASHLEY: Guys, this is really familiar to me.

(all laugh)

LAURA: We spent a whole game doing–

MARISHA: Well, we took a wrong turn, I guess.

LIAM: I don't know. We were flexing our muscles a little bit.

LAURA: Flexing our muscles.

MARISHA: Yeah, I like it.

LAURA: Plus you got us new armor out of it.

TRAVIS: And I got naked, too.

MATT: As you guys begin to step into the next lengths of your subterranean journey, we'll pick that up next week. Thank you all so much for tuning into Critical Role.

LAURA: Man, oh man, oh man.

MATT: Some tense battles. An intense encounter choice on you guys' part. Well done on that.

ASHLEY: I want to keep going.

LIAM: Who's this guy?

MATT: What is this?

ZAC: All right, so. Amy was the winner of our first giveaway.

MATT: Congrats, Amy.

(all cheer)

MARISHA: Huzzah.

ZAC: I ask whoever hasn't signed this, we're going to pass it around to all sign it for Amy.

MATT: Awesome, we'll all do that.

ZAC: As a thank-you for Amy, she's an avid fan.

LAURA: Yay!

MATT: Thank you, Amy, that's awesome.

MARISHA: Thanks for being a fan.

ASHLEY: Thanks, Amy.

ZAC: As a personal challenge, guys, from me to you, I think we are, what are we, 18 away, Lucas?

LUCAS: 19.

LAURA: 19?

MATT: 19 away from our next package?

ZAC: From the next one.

LUCAS: Is it at 1,550?

ZAC: Yeah.

LUCAS: Oh, we're 29 away.

LAURA: Oh, okay.

MATT: Aw.

ZAC: Are you sure?

LUCAS: Yeah, we're at 1,521.

ZAC: Okay, so we've got a little bit of a ways to go, but I'm going to go ahead and have these guys sign this one as well, and I'm going to push you guys that by the end of tonight, if we reach 1,550, I'll go ahead and throw this in with the next promo kit, as well. And if not I'll hang onto it for myself, and I won.

MATT: Boom.

ZAC: Thank you guys so much. That was fun. It gets more intense like every week.

MATT: That's apparently the path this is taking, so–

MARISHA: We keep getting knocked unconscious.

TRAVIS: We make amazing decisions.

(all laugh)

ZAC: And just so you guys know, that was the chat room that decided on your fate.

LAURA: You?

TRAVIS: Sons of bitches.

MATT: Yeah, second week in a row.

TRAVIS: (sings) Why can't we be friends?

ALL: (sing) Why can't we be friends?

MATT: So the chat room creature choice, those will be an occasional thing, not a weekly thing, 'cause it's too difficult to keep up with that and a little too random. Plus that's just too many creatures to be prepared for. But every few weeks or so, I'm gonna throw one out there for you guys. So come and watch. Hopefully you'll be there for one of those episodes. Put your friends together, vote for the creature you want to see them fight, and if a TPK happens, not my fault, it's totally on you guys.

LAURA: Is that a total party kill?

MATT: Total party kill.

ZAC: That's intense. So, guys, we're not going to go offline just now. We're going to stick around for a little while. We're going to throw it up while we move some cameras, so I'm going to leave it up to the chat room. It's up to you guys, we can either come back and play some Bloodborne on the PS4 that you guys bought us, or we can come back and play some Just Dance 2014 that you guys also bought us. So there's dancing or Bloodborne. It's up to you guys.

MATT: Dancing is fun to watch, Bloodborne just to watch him get really, really angry.

ZAC: I don't get angry. Lucas gets angry, though.

MATT: This game, the beginning of this game will make you angry. All right, all right.

MARISHA: You don't get angry? Have you played Dark Souls or Demon Souls? Because–

ZAC: I think actually–

MATT: Demon Souls mimics, man, I know the pain you're in for.

ZAC: What was it like, Bachee or something like that? Man, that game pissed me off.

ORION: Bocce ball?

ZAC: Wings of– ire, ear, something like that.

MATT: Oh yeah, I know what you're talking about.

ZAC: Man, that was heavy. Would any of you guys be interested in sticking around to dance a round or two if we were to go to Just Dance? It's a nightly staple here. We end the nights with dancing. I don't know if you guys have seen that ridiculousness, but–

MATT: Who would want to stick around for that?

ZAC: They're all shivering in fear, you guys

LIAM: How soon will that start? I'll stay for 20.

MATT: We can stay for a little bit.

ZAC: I bet they're are all going to ask for dancing now.

LUCAS: See a lot of Bloodborne, actually.

ZAC: Oh, really?

MATT: Oh, I live for Bloodborne, man.

ZAC: Well, the second– 

Pre-Show

MATT: Hello everyone! Welcome to Critical Role tonight! We have some interesting adventurous points to go over. We're also coming off International Tabletop Day, which we had a great time. Met a lot of the wonderful fans, one of which had created their own t-shirt of our group and inspired us to do the same! So you'll see a bunch of us wearing our fantastic, full assortment of Critical Role party member t-shirts tonight. Just for fun. In the meantime, let's go ahead and get this started, as we all have the chance to warm up with character backgrounds and maybe a little surprise. So be back here in a few minutes, guys!

(drumming battle music) (drumming battle music continues) (character intros)

MATT: Welcome back, everyone! The new intro tonight, which I think we're all pretty damn proud of, was put together by our fantastic overlord, Zac.

(all cheering)

MATT: It put him to work for quite some time, also the mixing and sound effects done by the amazing Alex Neat and the music you heard was composed by the amazingly talented Jason Charles Miller. So if you don't know Jason you should look him up. He's done stuff for The Guild and many other web shows. Also a fantastic musician on his own with his own stuff. He is the lead singer of Godhead. He's just a good guy. Also a voice actor, look him up if you have any time. Good people, and he lent his talents to our intro so we really appreciate that, buddy. Also we had a great time at Tabletop Day. Got to meet some of our fans. Got to take some pictures. Bunch of cool folks. Some of us got to go on the stream at certain points in the day. All around a good time! So those of you that got a chance to come, thank you so much! And a fan created, as I mentioned before, this awesome t-shirt with the roster, so we were all really inspired to go ahead and make some of our own. Got the party showing off their Critical Role positive.

MARISHA: So one of the things we were actually talking about doing, so we'd like to give a shout out to the person who made this, big shout out to @RuzGofDi. Thank you! For doing this. A lot of people have been asking for shirts. I don't know if you guys maybe would be into that or not. So we thought maybe we would wear these, see what you guys thought. But if you guys are into it, we thought about doing a limited run of these and making this the first of our fan-designed t shirts.

SAM: First of many.

MARISHA: First of many. Every once in awhile we'll have fans submit designs and then we'll pick a winner. Each one will be a limited run. So if you guys will like this, let us know, and maybe we'll make it happen.

SAM: I'm wearing one right now in my underpants, which we will be selling next week.

MARISHA: Yes, and there might be some stills of that to order.

ORION: I'm going to wear mine next game.

TALIESIN: Next game.

MATT: I guess some people are into the idea, let the chat know. People seem to be, and we'll be putting more designs out, getting some shirt possibilities to you guys in the near future.

MARISHA: Let us know in the chat guys.

LIAM: Wait wait wait, I've got some thing. I just gave everyone in the party rupees, treasure!

MARISHA: Rupees!

LIAM: These were sent to me by Tim West who has a great new company called Fantasy Coin HQ. If you go to fantasycoinhq.com he makes - Matt's holding up a dwarven coin at the moment - they make gems, they make fantasy coins, nerd coins.

SAM: Are we doing free ads now for people?

LIAM: This is just a thank you!

MATT: This is a thank you.

LIAM: Check it out. Or if you just hit a really tall tuft of grass with a sword, these will pop out of it so you don't have to order them. Just mow your lawn.

MARISHA: They're hefty, too.

ORION: If these were rupees, this is what they would feel like.

MARISHA: I kind of want to throw them at people across the room!

ORION: I want to trade them, put them in a pouch.

MATT: Also guys, as a note, we have, available tonight for the person, for people who have managed to get themselves to 2,150 subscribers tonight, we will send out another promo kit to one of you folks in the chat with another signed picture of our Critical Role cast. So be sure to see if we can get the subscribers to climb up as well, so keep an eye out for that in the evening so we can give out one of those before the night is over. That would be awesome.

SAM: Let's do this!

MATT: Let's kick into the game proper, guys! Let's get some proper music playing, because that's what I do.

ORION: That's what I baby do right.

SAM: (Beatboxing)
Part I

MATT: So last we left off, music's not playing here. I need music!

SAM: Doesn't matter.

MATT: The music's important to me! The party had been traveling into the dwarven city of Kraghammer at the behest of arcanist Allura Vysoren in search of a halfling paladin, a very revered folk hero named Lady Kima of Vord who had gone missing following a vision quest somewhere beneath the dwarven city of Kraghammer, supposedly for some great evil that was germinating there, festering and growing. After you guys traversed through the dwarven city, you began to find your way downinto the mines. The mythril mines of Greyspine beneath the dwarven town. After a few fateful encounters, the return of your gnome cleric.

ASHLEY: Hey, that's me!

MATT: Grog having his proverbial brains blown out by an intellect devourer. The party then decided to make friends with a mind flayer, an illithid that had been cast out from its people seeking vengeance and possible return to its people. Upon making this alliance, they made an attack on the dwarven, or the duergar, war camp that is threatening to rise up and attack Kraghammer from deep within the mountains themselves. The attack was successful. The general was killed, interrogated, and some interesting information was gleaned from him before his brain was sucked out from his head by Clarota, the mindflayer friend. However, this attack also announced to the local war camp of your presence and in the process of attempting to escape, the druid was damaged and lost her eagle form and thus began a freefall of many party members. A haphazard attempt to use the magic carpet far over its weight limit led most of the party to come crash landing and nearly killing everyone. Managed to escape, walled themselves in thanks to Keyleth's stone wall spell. And after staying the evening in one of the deeper tunnels, and barely avoiding a roving band of duergar there, you managed to find yourselves in battle with two ogres carrying some sort of strange, mutated, black pudding ooze contained in a glass container. The glass container being shattered, of course, by an explosive arrow created by Percy and fired by Vex.

LAURA: Go us!

MATT: At the very start of the battle, led into a very rough battle with this strange mutating ooze that kept splitting and splitting, until through some good teamwork, crafty use of telekinesis and a nearby lava pool, and general high damage rolls, you guys managed to survive the encounter.

TRAVIS: Barely.

MATT: Making your way to the bottom of this tunnel, you found yourself looping back around to the large crevice where the giant waterfall had fallen in before, where you had met Clarota. Which allowed you to retrieve your bear Trinket.

LAURA: Yeah! Trinket!

MATT: We pick up as you guys begin to step down into the lower tunnels, the ones that are partially coated with a series of magma pools and falls that are trickling out of the rockside. All right everyone.

SAM: I was just so out of it last time. Have we rested? Are we in some need of rest?

LAURA: We should probably rest.

SAM: What are we around? What's near us? Is this just a tunnel? Is there any sort of shelter, caves?

LAURA: We're by that lake with the giant monster.

LIAM: We circled all the way back around.

SAM: Oh shit.

LAURA: And went down to that place that you told us not to go in the first place? Yeah, that's where we ended up.

SAM: How was that for you?

(all laugh)

MATT: So essentially there was–

SAM: We're back in the camp.

MATT: You're under the camp. You're where the giant chasm leads down into the waterfall. There is a pool of water at the bottom where the aboleth was in the water.

LIAM: We just barely survived the chat room and now we need to rest.

TRAVIS: (chuckles) The chatroom. Take it easy on us, all right?

MATT: You guys also just woke up about two, three hours ago.

LAURA: Right, so we don't really - oh, we can take hit points.

MATT: You guys can take a short rest and use your hit dice to heal up. You didn't take any damage last game. Thankfully you stayed out of the fray.

SAM: So I'm okay. That's all I need to know.

MATT: You did use one of your Dominate spells.

SAM: Okay.

MATT: Only thing of note. So the rest of you who need to heal up can use this time to take a short rest and use your hit dice to heal up on your own.

TRAVIS: I'm ready. Who we fighting next?

SAM: Anyone need some healing? Are we all okay? Are we all good?

ASHLEY: I think we're all good. Where's everybody at in terms of…

ORION: Well, I'm fine.

LAURA: On a personal level, or?

ASHLEY: You mean like in life, or?

SAM: As we survey the area, how many tunnels we looking at? What's our options here?

MATT: So, (all laugh)

TRAVIS: He's back, he's back.

ORION: Would you calm down?

MATT: Let me pull out this visual aid for you. This is the tunnel sequence you guys have traversed down to the main area where the goblin encampment was. This is the large bridge that went across the giant chasm to where the duergar war camp was. This is the giant drop-off at the waterfall. You guys are currently in this section about to go deeper into this tunnel where a series of small magma trickles are pouring out of the rock.

SAM: So we never went up to the war camp and through it.

MATT: You did.

SAM: Oh we did!

LIAM: We crashed down by the tunnel, we fled. We sealed up the way behind us, ran in.

SAM: Got it. So we should keep going? We should just keep going. Magma? Follow the magma.

LIAM: Well I recommend. We don't want to go up and through the camp again?

LAURA: No no no, we're going into the cavern.

LIAM: So we're going to backtrack the way we came to that war camp road, yes?

LAURA: No, we're going into the tunnel.

SAM: Did you see the visual aid?

ORION: Yes, we are going into the lava tunnel.

LAURA: No no no, in through the tunnel.

LIAM: I'll just follow. I thought I understood.

MATT: (laughs) It's been a week.

SAM: I mean there might be something to be gleaned from going back to the war camp.

LAURA: That tunnel.

LIAM: We went out of there.

LAURA: No no no no no.

MATT: You guys came through here, you traveled across over the war camp, went back here and tunneled below.

LAURA: And popped this out right there. So now we're going into this.

MATT: Correct. Maps.

LIAM: And just to make sure that my memory is on point–

TRAVIS: It's not.

LIAM: –Before we circled back around, we hit a fork in the road where we could have gone up and we could have gone down.

MATT: Correct.

LIAM: So that's behind us.

LAURA: That's behind us, we're going down down down.

LIAM: Cheers.

MATT: Cheers indeed, huzzah. All right.

LAURA: Shall we?

ASHLEY: We shall!

SAM: Is Clarence with us still?

MATT: Clarota is indeed with you. Clarota took a large black iron duergar bolt to the chest earlier and is mostly recovered but is still even more hunched than usual.

LAURA: Does he need healing?

ASHLEY: He also ate those brains.

MATT: The brains helped him–

ASHLEY: Helped him a little bit?

MATT: –keep healthy, but he's still a little wounded but he's taking his time to rest up. He seems to be okay. Not as worse for wear as he was before. A slight wheeze that's always to him still present.

ASHLEY: He's just always a little weezy.

LAURA & LIAM: (meh meh meh sounds)

MATT: Sounds just like that. So, as you guys begin to push down into this lower chasm, the temperature of the air itself grows steadily warmer and warmer with a drier heat.

ORION: This feels nice.

MATT: You find yourselves, especially those of you with thick armor–

ASHLEY: Oh, it's so hot!

MATT: –You find that sweat beads begin to trickle down the side of your face–

ASHLEY: I'm sweating!

MARISHA: You're all glisteny!

MATT: –And begin to pool and gather in parts of your chestplate.

SAM: Pike, if you'd like me to hold your armor or do you want me to take it off for a little while?

ASHLEY: No, I'll keep it on just for safety.

SAM: Let it hang out a little bit?

LIAM: Do you even lift, bro?

SAM: Just saying, you might feel more comfortable with a loose fitting sort of cloak?

LAURA: Scanlan, stop being creepy!

SAM: I'm not creepy! I'm just trying to be mindful!

ASHLEY: No, it's fine Scanlan.

TRAVIS: Very considerate of you, a gentleman's offer.

ASHLEY: Yeah, it's okay. I'll keep it on.

SAM: I'll just have to use my imagination.

MARISHA: A gentleman's offer, yes. That's what we'll call it from now on.

TRAVIS: What permission?

SAM: Onward.

MATT: Pressing further down, the air itself that once had a kind of a hint of that sulfur smell, is now becoming stronger and stronger as you step deeper and deeper into this cavernous tunnel. It rests about 30 feet to 40 feet at width and about 25, 30 feet up and it varies to come pinched tighter or wider at moments, but it continues to be a steady downward climb in a continuous direction. The small trickles, some of them pool and gather into these small, magma cups if you will. Molten hot magma, I knew it was coming.

ORION: (murmurs) I was just wondering if it would happen.

MATT: Ooh, that's minus 200 experience points.

(all laugh)

ORION: I feel a bit weaker now.

MATT: You get about 20 or 30 minutes deeper into this tunnel before the sweltering heat gets noticeably warmer and as you crest a slight incline and decline over a small hill portion of this tunnel, you can see now a large portion of the rock has collapsed on the left side and a gargantuan pool of magma is pooling into the tunnel, essentially covering half of the tunnel you are traversing down. It can be walked on the side of safely at about two or three at shoulder width, but you only have about a 15 foot width here and the rest of it is just extremely bright, hot, molten rock.

LAURA: Does it hurt us to get near it?

MATT: No, but it's uncomfortable and something to be very aware of and to watch your step.

ORION: I feel great!

MATT: You feel great.

LIAM: I would just like to point out that we're nine adults playing don't touch the hot lava at the moment.

(all laugh)

SAM: Keyleth, you don't have any way of - say it gets hotter than this? You don't have any way of getting some water out here?

ORION: Ooh! I do! And I pull out an empty bottle.

LAURA: Oh? Oh?

LIAM: Tiberius, I've seen that bottle a lot. What does it do?

ORION: Oh! Um well, uh. I pull out two bottles. This one - they're both empty bottles - but this one is an air bottle and this one is a water bottle.

LIAM: Oh! Thank you! That clears that up!

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Even I feel dumber right now.

(all laugh)

SAM: Your intelligence is now four.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Four…three and a half.

LIAM: Does it make a lot of water?

ORION: Oh! This, if we ever need air–

SAM: I think that's the water one that you just pulled out.

ORION: I take it out (wind SFX). I control a small gust.

LAURA: Yes, but what about water? Oh my.

ORION: This, if we need water - And I do a small stream.

MATT: Okay. So a little bit of water just begins to pour perpetually, and without seeming end due to the size of the bottle.

SAM: It's like a piss stream!

LAURA: Oh, nice!

ORION: So, if you want to just squirt - and I do a small, little squirt-blasts on Scanlan.

SAM: Ahh!

LAURA: Oh, okay. Lovely.

LIAM: Is that unlimited?

ORION: Well, of course it is! Why would I carry a non-magical item on me? That's ridiculous.

ASHLEY: Just a water bottle.

ORION: So yes, Scanlan, we're fine.

SAM: That's good to know.

LAURA: So, should we try to cross this little path here?

ASHLEY: That sounds cool!

SAM: That's really cool.

LAURA: Can I use my tracking to see any of those duergar? To see if any of them have passed through the area; if there's a large group of them ahead of us?

MATT: Sure.

LAURA: I can use my tracking and my favored terrain to see how many within six miles, if there's a large group of them.

MATT: Yes you can. All right. Go ahead and roll for your tracking check on that.

LIAM: First roll.

MATT: I believe it's survival.

LAURA: Ooh! Here we go!

TRAVIS: Do it for the Star Wars trailer.

MARISHA: Roll. Roll. Roll.

MATT: This is with advantage, I believe, because it's your favored terrain, correct?

LAURA: Oh, okay.

MARISHA: (singing) Your favored terrain!

LAURA: Okay, that's better. Is that it?

LIAM: Survival.

LAURA: 21?

MATT: 21! All right. You take a moment, and about 30 to 40 feet, you go through and inspect the way the terrain's been pushed and the dirt has been shoved aside. Tracking footprints and scuff marks on the rock and the walls nearby, seeing if any of the flows have been interrupted recently, and you ascertain that there is actually a pretty continuous patrol through here. About once every four to eight hours up and down this tunnel that contain anywhere from five to 10 or more duergar, sometimes other, larger creatures. You find footprints that resemble maybe the ogres you mentioned earlier, possible troll footprints, but you're not familiar with that entity. You also notice some of the walls have what looks like small, localized cave-ins, almost as if something had burrowed through at one time or another.

TRAVIS: Awesome. Great.

MATT: Large, large creatures. So, there's also things that exist outside of the tunnel system.

ASHLEY: Like Tremors?

LAURA: So, as quickly as possible, we should get through these tunnels, I assume?

MATT: Probably a good idea. As a note though, you said within six miles?

LAURA: Yes.

SAM: six miles?!

MATT: As you continue tracking down this tunnel - and it takes you a good three or four hours to finally reach a point where the tunnel begins to widen up - you assess that, maybe three miles up, there is a localized town. Or, at least, a population of duergar amassed in a central place.

LIAM: Check out the brain on Brad!

LAURA: So three to four miles up, you said, from where we are at this point?

MATT: Yeah. From where you began.

TRAVIS: Should we be stealthing?

LAURA: We should probably start stealthing at this point, yes.

LIAM: Yes. I was about to say I'd like to move ahead of the group a bit and start sneaking along.

MATT: Let's do that! Go ahead and roll stealth.

LIAM: Do I have advantage like my sister had for–

MATT: You do not.

LIAM: No. All right, well–

LAURA: Should we all try to stealth?

LIAM: 26 for me.

MATT: This would be a group stealth check.

LIAM: 26. I've tiptoed away.

SAM: 19.

MARISHA: 15.

TALIESIN: Seven.

TRAVIS: 17.

ASHLEY: Seven.

LAURA: 20.

LIAM: 26.

MATT: All right.

ASHLEY: (laughs)

MATT: Picking up on the shortcomings of a handful of members of your group, you do manage to maintain what you feel is a fairly stealthy advance deeper into this tunnel system. About an hour and a half of perpetual travel, as the tunnel slowly widens further and further, with every quarter mile or so, you eventually get to a point where the tunnel shoots open into a gargantuan cavern. A chamber nearly a mile and a half across from this visual point.

ASHLEY: (quietly)…of secrets?

MATT: It is extremely tall, with hundreds of very jagged stalagmites hanging from the ceiling, and rock formations that rise and fall at different points of the topography. This entire tunnel is built in this strange, large, natural, downward curve that disappears out of sight about a mile ahead and to the left. But this huge tunnel is lit with what looks like maybe two to three dozen various small lava falls that are pouring down the sides of this giant cavern's structure. You also see some small pockets of that red glow stone that a lot of these Dwarven tunnels tend to use as a light source. You also, as you begin to step into this, carefully - you, taking point on this, both the twins; you notice - on the far end of this cavern… Well, first off, the entire landscape is rough and craggy, with large, black, obsidian spikes just jutting out of the ground at various points. Whether it be seismically created or otherwise, it's a very unwelcoming atmosphere. And that sulfurous smell is extremely strong. Even though you've gotten used to it as far as you can for this travel, it's still a very pungent odor and you find that it's going to be very difficult for you to make out any other scent in this location right now other than that horrible mixture of chemicals that probably isn't very healthy to be breathing at the moment. What you see across the chamber, your eyes focus on a small cluster of buildings, it looks, of a similar construct as the barracks that you saw at the war camp. You can probably surmise somewhere in the neighborhood of about 20 to 25 of these structures, all localized in this one area that is punctuated with - you can count about seven of these black obsidian spires that rise out at different points around like watchtowers.

LIAM: Still natural?

MATT: No, these are constructed. These are very smooth and have that rigid Dwarvish construction with a jagged edge to each one of the leveled lips of these towers. The one that you can see closest to you, which is about a quarter mile off, you can just barely make out what looks like a couple of duergar walking across one of the upper levels and what looks like some sort of ballista and/or anti-personnel weapon that is put–

LAURA: This is where Kima's being held.

SAM: How do you know that?

LAURA: She had a vision.

ORION: Plus, it's a really big thing.

SAM: That's true.

MATT: These giant bolt-throwers currently reside on each one of these, and then in the center of this cluster of buildings, you see standing a gargantuan ebony fortress. Serrated stonework marks the top of each wall and more of these giant bolt-throwers are mounted across the parapets. A massive magma fall descends from the rocky ceiling, right above the stronghold, onto the roof and is forked onto each side and then continues to flow down, buttressing each side of the stronghold almost as a defense mechanism, like they built it intentionally underneath this magma fall.

SAM: Wow.

LAURA: Oh, that's where the trapdoor is!

SAM: What? Trapdoor?

TRAVIS: There's a trapdoor.

LAURA: Yeah.

MARISHA: Wait…under the magma?

LAURA: You missed a lot, Scanlan.

MARISHA: Oh, right.

SAM: I was with you the whole time.

ORION: Yes, but you were never paying attention.

SAM: I was drunk.

ORION: You got that new magazine and you've been staring at it a long time.

SAM: Well, it's hot gnomes.

LIAM: Vax creeps back to Pike and ushers her up to the front. Do you recall any of the details from your vision, from your dreams?

ASHLEY: I've definitely been here in my vision.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: I do remember that much. All of this looks familiar, and I think we're in the right place.

LAURA: Sweet.

ORION: Very good. That's all important.

ASHLEY: Do we know what else is around? What was the building again? With the–

SAM: It's a fortress.

MATT: The giant building you see is called Emberhold. That's what it's been referred to as.

SAM: And it's not a temple?

MATT: It's not a temple, it is a fortress. The temple of where apparently K'Varn as far as you know exists is further below in the fungal forest that surrounds this ancient city ruin that has been repurposed by the illithids that Clarota actually came from.

LAURA: Oh, yes! And we know here, because the general that we mind melded - Clarota read his brain.

SAM: Yeah, I was there!

LAURA: I know. It's just you were drunk, so I'm reiterating it.

(all laugh)

SAM: Yeah yeah, good, thank you for that.

ORION: Just making sure.

TALIESIN: You had this very vivid look the whole time.

LAURA: So remember, Scanlan, that the general said that on the left side of the fortress–

SAM: Of the fortress.

LAURA: –is how we can get into the trapdoor.

SAM: How we can get into the trapdoor, exactly.

LIAM: By the smaller–

SAM: Smaller–

LIAM: –of two lava flows.

LAURA: By the smaller of two lava flows.

SAM: –of two…what?

LAURA: Lava flows.

ASHLEY: So what we're looking at is the fortress?

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: You're looking at Emberhold itself, the center of the duergar society and from what you've gleaned from two different duergar that you've interrogated, supposedly where Lady Kima has been held should she still–

LAURA: by King Murghol?

MATT: –By King Murghol. Murghol and Queen Ulara.

LIAM: From our vantage point can we see the two lava flows that we were warned about?

MATT: It is way too far away. That stronghold is probably a good mile and a half away from you right now.

LAURA: So, there is a lot of cover as we go near it because of all the…?

MATT: There is a lot of cover, yes, but it's a lot of open area with cover, so it's one of those you're just going to have to be careful as you move through.

SAM: Percy.

LAURA: It's pretty dark here, right?

TALIESIN: Yes?

SAM: How long would it take you to make a nuclear weapon?

MATT: Yes, it's pretty dark here, the only reason you can see much is because of the low light vision.

TALIESIN: A very long time. If I start it right now..

MATT: Even at this radius, things you could see nearby, a light source would be very helpful in making sure that you can see details and not fall in anything you don't want to, but it also makes you very visible to anything else out there, so you have to decide.

LIAM: Between the lava and the red stones, the twins can see, correct? Because of the dim light.

MATT: You can see near, but these are things that are a mile away.

LAURA: But nothing at a distance.

LIAM: Right, right, right.

MATT: It's way too far away. The reason you can make out this small city and Emberhold itself is because there are clusters of the red glowstone used within that city and the giant magma fall that currently envelops the sides of the stronghold, making it very, very visible and easy to pick out against the rest of the cavern.

ASHLEY: So this is a whole little city down here.

LIAM: Yes.

MATT: About a mile off, yeah.

LAURA: So we should keep to the left and head down that direction and try to–

MARISHA: I'm actually gonna go ahead and cast Pass Without A Trace.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: (whispering) What does that do?

MARISHA: (whispering) It makes us really stealthy.

SAM: Oh, cool!

ORION: It's the thing that saved our butts last time.

LIAM: It quiets your parts.

MATT: You've seen this before. As she finishes her incantation, you feel the darkness of the shadows around you begin to coalesce and almost stick to you. Although there's no substance, for a moment you almost find yourself repulsed by it, until you realize that it's probably an advantageous circumstance. But you find yourself now much easier to slip into the surrounding shadows.

MARISHA: They're nice shadows.

TRAVIS: And I'm doing my flower girl routine with the dust of tracelessness. Just over here, over there, put a little on Pike.

TALIESIN: We don't really need - Well…

TRAVIS: What? We've got a really large amount.

ORION: You never know, Percy, he does it all the time. We don't know how many times it's saved us.

MARISHA: (laughing) We've got a really large amount.

TALIESIN: I suppose that's fair.

SAM: What's our angle here, gents?

LIAM: We need to get closer up. We need to find this trap door, because it's suicide going in the front.

LAURA: Right. And Lady Kima's being held here.

SAM: So there's an entrance to this trap door that possibly is on the outskirts of the city?

LIAM & LAURA: Yes.

SAM: So we need to find it.

LAURA: Yes, it's on the left.

SAM: Oh, it's on the left?

LAURA: Yes, so we're heading left and going–

SAM: Let's do it!

LIAM: The twins will creep - continue ahead.

ASHLEY: Yeah, you guys real stealthy, so–

TRAVIS: Yeah, keep creeping, keep creeping.

ASHLEY: –Probably smart that you're moving ahead.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: I'll take point on the group that's following.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: You guys take care of Trinket as I'm ahead of you.

ASHLEY: Come on, Trinket.

TRAVIS: (growling sounds) Me and Trinket are telling jokes in the back of the group.

SAM: Quietly.

MARISHA: Classic Trinket.

MATT: All right. You guys continue staying off the main path and you can see there is about a 20-foot natural formation of a walkway or at least where most of the patrols and any sort of duergar foot travel is localized. You can see where that natural road has been created over time. You avoid that path and steer off to the left, dodging between the various bits of terrain. And it's a very rocky and difficult terrain should you not be with your ranger, who has the Underdark as her favored terrain.

LAURA: Oh, I'll go back, then. Should I? Or is it okay because we're all together?

MATT: It's okay because you guys are in theory together. I'm going to say essentially you're just marking places where the terrain would be dangerous, to watch your step and to be wary of any locations that might be unsafe for load bearing, anything like that.

TRAVIS: Yeah, I saw that look. You calling me load bearing?

(all laugh)

MATT: Yes!

TRAVIS: That's honest.

MATT: Specific. As you guys begin to curve around the left, everyone roll a perception check real fast.

SAM: Oh, snap.

TRAVIS: Prepare for a natural… lap.

ORION: With our proficiency bonus?

MATT: Only if you're proficient with perception.

SAM: I can't read the dice. It's either a six or a nine. No idea.

ORION: 15.

MATT: Is there a dot on the bottom?

SAM: Oh, that's the bottom?

MATT: Yeah.

SAM: It's a six!

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Oh, Scanlan!

MARISHA: 16.

ORION: 15.

TALIESIN: 24.

TRAVIS: Nine.

ASHLEY: 19.

LAURA: 20.

LIAM: 25.

MATT: All right. Both Percy and Vax simultaneously put their arms out to hold everyone back as you instinctively–

LIAM: Dtdtdt!

MATT: –You hear a slight distant clanking of metal and voices. Low, kind of conversational voices. Too far for you to listen at this point. But you guys immediately stop everyone. And you can just see, over maybe a good 70, 80 feet from your distance, heading up the path you guys had just began to skirt around, a small, what looks like a roving patrol of duergar. Probably the ones that go up and down the tunnel.

LAURA: I can ambush them!

SAM: Ambush them?

LAURA: Yeah, yeah, yeah!

TALIESIN: (whispering) Let them pass.

SAM: Why don't we create a distraction and get rid of them?

LAURA: Well, okay, but I can - (whispering) I can be really quiet. I can do Hide In Plain Sight now. So, I could completely hide myself standing there.

SAM: How many are there? Are you gonna kill–

MATT: No one's seen them, you can just hear them. No one's gone to check.

LAURA: Oh! Can I look?

LIAM: Yes, let's go look.

MATT: You can.

LAURA: Okay, let's look.

LIAM: Let's go catch one.

MARISHA: (quietly) Can we not just hide?

MATT: Just the two of you?

ORION: How far away are we from them? Like, in distance?

MATT: Right now? You're guessing about 80 to 70 feet, but closing fast. Not closing directly on you, because they're doing a slightly different path.

LAURA: (whispering) Everybody stay quiet.

TALIESIN: They're taking the path that we're not on, right?

MATT: Correct.

TALIESIN: So, if we hide–

LAURA: They won't find us.

TALIESIN: –They won't find us.

LAURA: Potentially.

ORION: And they can just pass.

LAURA: But I want to hear what they're saying.

MATT: Okay, so all of you guys, who's–

MARISHA: We'll all hide. I go ahead and cast Guidance on Vax.

LAURA: What does that mean?

LIAM: Vex.

MATT: Is that a concentration spell?

LAURA: I'm Vex, he's Vax. We look alike, it's understandable.

MATT: Just checking if it's concentration or not, because that will definitely break your other spell. I'll pull it up here real fast.

LAURA: Oh, no, then don't. Keep Pass Without A Trace.

TRAVIS: Well, we could just get this party started right here, if we want to.

MARISHA: Let me see, it might just be–

MATT: Guidance is concentration.

MARISHA: No, sorry, you don't have my guidance.

LAURA: That's okay, that's okay.

MARISHA: No guidance here.

LIAM: Why don't we go just up ahead and scout?

LAURA: Just a little bit ahead and see what we can see.

MATT: Okay. So, the two of you kind of work up. As the rest of you are holding back, the twins slink between the various rock formations and strange, jagged spires that are currently peppering this entire underground landscape. You get up to a point where you're maybe 10 feet from the road and with your backs against the rock, you can begin to see the roving band slowly move around.

SAM: (whispering) Band?

MATT: The band of duergar. You count, at quick glance, roughly 12 to 15.

MARISHA: Oh, yeah…

MATT: Armed with hammers, halberds, um… Both of you guys roll a perception check right now.

LIAM: Perception check.

MATT: Perception check. Specific for this one.

LIAM: 26.

LAURA: 17.

MATT: You make out that one of them holds no weapons. Instead is dressed in–

LAURA: Wait, no! I get advantage on perception, because I'm in my favored terrain.

MATT: There you go.

LIAM: I already perceived it.

LAURA: Oh, yeah, never mind, okay.

(all laugh)

MATT: You can also perceive, I suppose.

ORION: (whispering) I already perceived it.

MATT: One of the duergar walking alongside is completely bald on top with this extremely long, well sculpted, black goatee beard that streams down. Thick black and red trimmed robes. Carries no weapons and looks extremely dangerous. However, as you're listening to the conversation, you specifically, being able to understand Undercommon–

LAURA: Yes.

LIAM: What is he saying?

LAURA: Hold on.

MATT: –You pick up bits and pieces as they begin to pass by. You hold your breath, hoping nobody notices you, and so far so good. They begin to walk slowly past the rock you guys are against. You overhear one of them say: “Well, keep your eyes peeled, eh. That thing is still out there.” And the other one slaps him and says: “Horek says that it ate a whole scouting party in seconds.” Another one goes: “Listening to Horek was your first mistake. Shut up and keep walking.” And they all keep pushing. At which point, the same scared one from before says: “I mean, if that one went crazy, well, can't the other ones crack, too? I don't know if I feel safe around any of K'varn's pets anymore at this rate.” And by that point, they begin to slowly move past and their voices begin to fade, as they continue up the path you guys just traversed down.

LAURA: (gasps)

MATT: Up to the lava tunnels.

LAURA: Oh shit.

TRAVIS: Good thing I was clearing our footprints.

(all laugh)

MATT: It's actually a very good thing.

SAM: It's a win for Grog.

TRAVIS: (high-pitched voice) Is it? Did I do something good?

LIAM: Good job, dummy.

MARISHA: (laughing) Did I do something good?

MATT: You guys have, like, bear tracks and a giant goliath, like, what– (laughs)

ORION: These are amazing.

MARISHA: What are they?

LAURA: Fried banana.

MARISHA: Oh! That's fun.

MATT: Fried bananas? Toss me one of those. Is that from the chat?

SAM: You're working. You don't have time to eat.

ZAC: (off screen) Yes, the chat room.

MATT & LAURA: Thank you, chatroom.

MARISHA: Thank you.

ORION: Thanks so much.

MATT: I know it's not a piece of pizza, guys, but I'll do what I can.

(all laugh)

SAM: Next time, sushi. Sushi.

ZAC: (off screen) Instajur and somebody who didn't put their name on it.

MATT: (disappointed) Oh.

ORION: Instajur and mystery guy, thanks!

ZAC: Coleson sent the pizza.

ALL: Thank you!

ASHLEY: Oh my god, that's so good.

MATT: The sound of the duergar walking eventually fades and you feel pretty confident that you're safe to return to the rest of the party.

LAURA: Okay. So, we walk back. So, apparently, number one, big party, we don't want to fight them if we don't have to. Secondly, there's some weirdo creature that's gotten loose and is very, very bad and it's killed multiple duergar already.

LIAM: Quickly.

LAURA: That might be the thing–

SAM: No indication of what kind of a creature it was?

LAURA: No, but it might be the thing we already killed. It could've been the thing with the plate that showed up in the camp, I don't know.

SAM: The thing with the plate?

ASHLEY: The thing in the red rider wagon.

TRAVIS: The bullet, the bullet.

LAURA: The big thing.

TRAVIS: Bulette.

MARISHA: Bulé.

SAM: Oh!

LAURA: It could've been that, I'm not sure.

TRAVIS: It's a French dog.

MARISHA: It's French, yeah.

LAURA: Regardless, we should be very careful, traveling forward.

TALIESIN: I've seen your sheet, you don't speak French.

SAM: We could use that to our advantage.

ORION: We could! We could. We could scare them off quite easily.

MARISHA: I had a grandmother who did, okay?

LAURA: I like the way you think. All right.

ORION: I can make funny sounds.

LAURA: Should we keep moving forward at a very stealthy sort of pace?

ORION: Waka waka.

MATT: Certainly.

TALIESIN: The stealthy mix.

MATT: You guys push forward, keeping that wide, kind of left curve, which adds a fair amount of time to your travel, as you're being careful and moving at a very very heavy, circular arc around the duergar city.

SAM: I'm looking for doors and stuff as we go. I don't know why.

MATT: Sure! Looking for doors!

SAM: Well, there's a trap door somewhere, right?

ORION: (old man voice) There's doors in them there caves.

MATT: Good thinking.

LIAM: That'll be the fortress, maybe, but–

LAURA: Possibly. Could be farther. Can we see the molten things that he was talking about? The lava flows?

MATT: Still too far away.

LAURA: Still too far away.

MATT: As you begin to make your way around, you're just starting to get to the point where you can see the front of the fortress. And you can see where the magma fall splits and just coalesces around each side of the stronghold. Almost like a blanket waterfall on each side. It does split up at certain points, you can begin to start making it out.

TALIESIN: Where does the magma runoff lead to? Does it just pour out? Does it fill a moat?

MATT: It's hard to tell from this distance, unfortunately. You'd have to get closer up to see. About an hour of travel around the side–

LAURA: Oh wow.

LIAM: I'm so bored.

LAURA: (laughs) Don't say that.

MATT: (laughs) That can be fixed, Liam.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: If only there were a way to just speed up this exposition somehow.

TRAVIS: Of all the things.

MATT: Indeed.

TALIESIN: Life isn't like that.

ORION: Wow, Percy!

TALIESIN: Sorry.

(all laugh)

LAURA: (whispering) Be quiet.

MATT: It's at this point, immediately catching your eye, Vex, one of the nearby obsidian spires is a different color than the rest. The rest are like a deep black, glass shiny color. This one is a dull crimson.

LAURA: Ooh! We should go towards that one.

SAM: Because it's a different color?

LIAM: Let's go check it out.

MARISHA: Wait, what was the first color? I was still laughing at Percy. What?

LIAM: Just eat your banana, the twins will go check it out.

MATT: Black obsidian, this was red–

MARISHA: (laughing) Red, okay.

MATT: –crimson, ruddy, anyway.

TALIESIN: Do you not know anything?

LIAM: The twins are gonna go have a peek.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: I'm coming with.

MATT: Scanlan comes with. Go ahead and roll a stealth check.

SAM: Oh boy. (laughs)

TALIESIN: I'm not coming with.

SAM: Not my strong suit.

TRAVIS: Don't fuck it up.

LAURA: No, Scanlan, what did you do?

LIAM: You dick!

TRAVIS: Did you?

MARISHA: What did you do?

(all laugh)

ORION: You can change your mind.

ASHLEY: Wait, wait, I go and–

SAM: I've got advantage, don't I?

ASHLEY: –I grab Scanlan and I kiss him on the cheek and make him stay.

(all gasp and exclaim)

ORION: What?!

TALIESIN: Way to take one for the team.

ORION: Oh no.

TRAVIS: I don't know.

LIAM: You just stopped him from farting into his flute.

ASHLEY: Persuasion? That would be…

ORION: Ladies and gentlemen, this is a huge moment.

MARISHA: Can you roll a persuasion against a critical fail? Can you? Can you persuade a crit fail?

LAURA: Can you persuade the DM?

ASHLEY: Wait, is it a fail?

MARISHA: (laughing) Can you persuade the DM?

ASHLEY: It is a one?

MATT: Okay, so it was a one–

SAM: It was a one.

LIAM: That's a one face.

(all laugh)

LIAM: That's a one face.

MATT: I will say, Pike, roll a perception check.

ORION: d20!

LAURA: Come on, come on, d20.

ASHLEY: Perception?

LIAM: Yes, d20. Uh, that's a half a d20.

ASHLEY: 14?

LAURA: (soft, high voice) No, no… yes, 14.

(all laugh)

SAM: I don't know.

LAURA: I'll stop.

MATT: Unfortunately, you're not quite perceptive enough to notice Scanlan's not quite so quiet walking away, as you're distracted by the surroundings and the circumstance locally. You continue up with the twins, absentmindedly humming to yourself.

SAM: (sings softly)

MATT: The twins, being used to your humming, for some reason it doesn't connect. You make your way up to the spire. At about 15, 20 feet out, you notice the coloration is different, because it is completely coated in what looks like dried blood of some kind.

LIAM: Fuck.

LAURA: (gasps) Oh god.

MATT: And immediately to the right of it, along the ground–

ORION: So grossed out.

MATT: –currently your vision is obscured by another, large kind of twisted stalactite, but there appears to be an arm and a whole bunch more dried blood across the ground, just out of view.

LAURA: (gasps) Stop! Can we stop? Can we stop?

MATT: You can stop.

MARISHA: An arm?

LAURA: Scanlan. Shh.

SAM: What? What?

LAURA: (whispering) You're singing.

SAM: I was singing? (whispering) I was singing? I didn't even know! It's a force of habit!

LIAM: I'm going to see if I can see anything in the area that has done this recently.

LAURA: Is the arm attached to whatever did–

MATT: Make an investigation check.

LIAM: Investigation check?

LAURA: –Is the arm part of a dead thing or is it alive?

MATT: It's on the ground.

TRAVIS: I'm pretty sure whatever it is, it's dead.

LIAM: Seven.

MATT: Seven?

LAURA: Can I check it out as well? I mean, I'm there, I might as well.

MATT: You can also attempt to make an investigation check.

LIAM: Clever. There you go.

LAURA: Wait, I'm doing advantage, too, just in case. Okay, that one's better.

LIAM: Oh, I can get advantage?

SAM: You get advantage on investigation?

LAURA: No, I got it because I'm fucking in my favored terrain.

(all laugh)

LAURA: 21.

MARISHA: You walk up in this terrain.

MATT: The state of the blood that you see around seems to indicate that this has transpired over some time. You're guessing probably within a few days, if not a week, since this happened.

LIAM: I'm picking up one of the arms–

LAURA: (Gasps)

LIAM: –to bring back to the group.

MATT: Okay, so as you walk up towards the arm to grab it, you have more of a view of what's happened. And what you see before you are definitely remnants of some battle long past.

LAURA: This is the skelly pile.

MATT: Against these rocky formations there's dried blood everywhere.

LIAM: Not pretty.

MATT: This terrible bloodbath, whatever this event was, it was probably a horrible thing to see. There are pieces of duergar flung about. And I say pieces - the only reason you know duergar were there is because occasionally you see part of a head, or part of a foot. And you recognize the ashy skin from the areas that aren't currently caked with its own gore.

LIAM: (gagging sounds)

MATT: From what you can tell, because of your investigation check, the remains are torn apart by no blade. There's no cuts, there's no clean wounds. They're either pulled apart by force–

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MATT: –like, arms and limbs were wrenched from the body just out of sheer power.

TRAVIS: Like a Wookiee.

MATT: Or there appears to be some sort of gnawing, some chewing, like toothy fangs, sharp teeth have partially eaten portions of these bodies.

LIAM: This is the work of a beaver.

LAURA: Yes, definitely, a very large beaver.

ORION: A busy beaver.

SAM: I think it's suicide.

(all laugh)

LAURA: Based on tracking and everything and insight, can we tell if that creature is anywhere nearby? Or if it's gone?

ORION: I think it might be foul play, actually.

MATT: From what you can tell–

LIAM: It happened in the past.

MATT: –Yeah, it happened quite some time ago. Looking at the tracks, you can see duergar feet, you can see other creatures that resemble those hook horrors that you encountered earlier during the lava pool. However, there's a series of tracks that you haven't seen. Well, there is very erratic footsteps that look human size, but they seem to be placed randomly, like one foot here, one foot here, one foot here.

LAURA: (gasps) It's that big creature that - it was like one of those things that that thing put together, like–

MATT: And you see what seem like strange strikes through the sand, like someone had been dragged very quickly in a very localized spot, scattered all about.

LIAM: It's a human centipede.

SAM: It is. It's a human centipede.

MATT: It's a very strange pattern that you can't really grasp what kind of creature would make it.

LAURA: And it seems like it was here recently, or a while ago?

MATT: Best you can tell, the last time it was here was about two or three days ago, to feast on more of the remains.

LIAM: Human? Human footprints?

LAURA: Should we get out of here?

MATT: Human sized.

LIAM: Human sized.

TRAVIS: Or set a trap.

LAURA: We could try to set a trap, or we could look and see if we can loot anything? Is there anything to loot? Does it look like anything shiny?

MATT: Any semblance of armor that belonged to any of these individuals is in such tatters that it's unusable. You do manage to find, across some of the body parts, a couple of blood-soaked gold coin purses.

LAURA: Okay.

MARISHA: Take it.

LAURA: I like gold.

MATT: One of them contains a handful of gems.

LAURA: Ooh!

MARISHA: Gems.

MATT: Yes, those right there. So you can mark that down, until you get a chance to appraise them.

LIAM: I don't think we want to tangle with this. What are we trying to prove? Let's just keep trucking.

SAM: I'm really bad at stealthing, we should go.

(all laugh)

SAM: We should leave.

LIAM: Also, put the accordion back in the bag, all right?

SAM: Was I doing that? It's force of habit, I don't - it's like breathing.

LIAM: Yeah, we're going to go back to the group, I'm going to bring the arm.

TRAVIS: I take out the cask of ale and pour a little tankard of ale, just because I'm bored.

ASHLEY: Have a sip sip.

MATT: Good man. Well done. It's very tasty.

TRAVIS: Would anyone else like a sip? Keyleth?

MATT: Having been underground for what probably amounts now to four or five days, that little taste of ale on your lips is a very welcoming and very refreshing sensation.

TRAVIS: It's good shit, right?

ASHLEY: Oh, delicious. Oh no, I'm drunk! Just kidding.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: That was fast! Just kidding.

LIAM: When we get back to the group, I'm going to toss the arm to Grog.

MATT: Grog, you instinctively reach up and catch it. You look down and see what looks like a duergar arm that has been very heavily mangled.

TRAVIS: Oh! Thanks for the hand!

(all laugh)

LIAM: It's a back scratcher.

ORION: That was clever, Grog!

LAURA: Well, we killed a lot of duergar this time.

TRAVIS: Don't negative anything. It was a good joke.

(all laugh)

MATT: It was a good joke. I considered it, but no.

TRAVIS: Have mercy!

ORION: That was a good joke.

LAURA: There's a big centipede-y human, creepy creature that's killed a lot of things and we should probably avoid that at all costs.

ORION: I would agree with that.

LIAM: If we have to, we will, but–

TALIESIN: That seems fair.

LAURA: Can we avoid that and still head left of the keep?

MATT: You haven't seen a creature.

SAM: Wait, we didn't make it into the - was there a structure that we could have entered?

LAURA: That's where we're going.

LIAM & MATT: You're heading towards that structure.

SAM: Okay. But I mean, where we just were?

ORION: The magma fortress.

MATT: Where you just were? No, there's just all these giant rocky spires jutting out of the ground.

LIAM: Spike coated in dried blood.

SAM: They didn't have doors in them?

LAURA: Should we probably have looked for like a nest?

MATT: There were no doors.

SAM: Okay, good. I'm looking for a door!

LIAM: No, we should just keep going. If we're going to run into it, we're going to run into it. Let's not find it.

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: It appears like there was, at one point in time, some very intense seismic activity in this area that created this cavern, and whatever is the source of a lot of this perpetually flowing, molten rock. That's why the entire terrain here is so dangerous and uninviting, is because of the sheer force that went into its creation.

SAM: Okay.

LAURA: So we should just keep freaking being careful and keep going towards the giant thing.

SAM: Okay. Let's go.

ASHLEY: Keep trucking on.

SAM: Pike, I have this weird feeling, like you wanted to make out with me. Is that something that happened? Am I dreaming?

ASHLEY: Well, you just, you know, you weren't paying attention.

SAM: Really?

LAURA: And that makes you want to make out with him?

ASHLEY: No, I think you were moving along to try to go stealth and sometimes you should just stay put and see what happens.

(all laugh)

ORION: Well said, cleric!

LIAM: That was the most adorable diss in history.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: That was cold.

SAM: All right.

ORION: Yet inviting.

TRAVIS: It's all right, Scanlan. We'll go pay for it later.

(all laugh)

MATT: A small hit to Scanlan's morale, but the party marches on.

LIAM: You lose an inspiration die.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Disadvantage on whatever roll.

SAM: I deserved it, I deserved it.

LIAM: Okay, twins in front, here we go.

LAURA: Let's keep going.

MATT: Twins in front. You guys continue to push forward. For the sake of the length of this journey, I'm going to have the party go ahead and roll a communal stealth check once more.

MARISHA: I still have Pass Without A Trace up.

TALIESIN: Oh, for the love of god.

MARISHA: Which gives everyone a plus 10.

LAURA: Oh, really?!

MATT: Yes.

LIAM: Percy! Don't bang the guns together.

TALIESIN: Yeah, that happened too.

ORION: 24.

MATT: 24?

SAM: 19.

LIAM: We all have plus 10?

MATT: Yes.

LAURA: And this is plus 10, already?

SAM: Yes.

TALIESIN: I rolled a one.

MATT: Okay.

(all groan)

LAURA: Oh, Percy!

SAM: I kiss Percy!

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: What?! Ah!

SAM: I don't know! I thought it might help.

ORION: You have to use the tongue, Scanlan.

MARISHA: 23.

SAM: Is that bubblegum?

MATT: Okay. Grog?

TRAVIS: 26.

ASHLEY: Three.

TALIESIN: I have a habit.

LAURA: (gasps) You have a plus 10.

ASHLEY: Oh! I get to do plus 10 bonus to that?

MATT: Yes.

ASHLEY: 13!

MATT: All right, so that's three failures.

LAURA: 30.

MARISHA: Three failures?

LIAM: 32.

MATT: Okay, good.

TALIESIN: (relieved) Ah!

MATT: More than half you guys succeeded. That bit is key. A one is two failures.

LAURA: Oh no!

ASHLEY: I'm not stealthy, man.

MARISHA: A one is two failures?

MATT: A one is considered two failures for this challenge. Pushing forward–

TALIESIN: Now you roll well.

MATT: –you manage to stop Percy and find out the root of this audio problem. Pushing forward, you manage to make your way about a quarter mile on the outskirts of this cluster of buildings. Curving far left, you're just managing to keep out of the city proper and move straight towards the very back wall of this cavern, which is buttressed against - what this fortress is built against. So you're circumventing the city to go straight to this fortress. As you're moving, about a quarter mile from the stronghold, Vex, you pick up a strange person standing maybe about 50, 60 feet ahead of you.

LAURA: Just a person?

MATT: Just a person, it looks like.

LAURA & ORION: (worried laughter)

LAURA: Can they see us? Does it look like they can see us?

MATT: You take a moment, keeping an eye out, and the person isn't moving. Just standing right there.

LAURA: (whispering) So. There's a person standing right there.

MARISHA: (whispering) What?

LAURA: (whispering) A person. He's just standing there.

MATT: It's too dark to make out any details, unfortunately.

LAURA: No. Hmm.

SAM: Could be good, could be bad. We have no idea.

LIAM: Can I see him now that she's pointed him out to me?

SAM: I can hold him. Might piss him off.

TRAVIS: At least do the hold.

MATT: You can see it. And there is a humanoid, standing on its own.

LIAM: It doesn't seem to be moving, though.

LAURA: Maybe it's a scarecrow?

LIAM: Maybe it's a statue.

LAURA: Yeah, that's what I mean.

TRAVIS: A statue?

SAM: Want me to go check it out?

LIAM: No! I don't!

LAURA: Can't you go invisible?

SAM: Yes, I can go invisible.

LAURA: Go invisible and check it out.

SAM: I polymorph and turn into a fly and I buzz over.

MARISHA: Oh, yay! That's fun.

LIAM: Good job, gnome nuts.

LAURA: Oh no, if he's magic, he's going to know.

SAM: It's all right. I've got magic, too.

MATT: You approach this individual and notice it is unmoving and is of a singular, solid color.

LAURA: (whispering) It's a statue.

MATT: What looks to be what is an illithid or a mind flayer is currently locked in some sort of reactionary position, but is completely turned to stone.

LAURA: Oh no!

MARISHA: Oh shit.

SAM: Like a Medusa type of a thing?

LIAM: We faced basilisks once and they did this to Vex'ahlia.

TRAVIS: We've got basilisk eggs.

MARISHA: There's a lot of things that can do this, actually, to be fair.

LAURA: We do have basilisk eggs in the bag of holding.

TRAVIS: Yeah, we've got eight of them. Maybe we should crack one on statue guy.

SAM: I buzz back to the group. (buzzing)

LAURA: Oh, what's that? Oh, it's Scanlan.

SAM: I kind of fuck with Tiberius's ear a little bit.

(all laugh)

ORION: Oh, Scanlan, stop it!

SAM: And I turn back.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Well, what did you see?

LAURA: What was it?

SAM: A crazy statue of a crazy illithid.

LIAM: That's crazy.

LAURA: Can we look at Clarota and say: “Do you know anything about this?”

MATT: Clarota kind of thinks for a second and goes: (breathy, raspy voice) “As far as I've noticed, occasionally these patrols do walk with a lizard creature that has this ability. It's generally used as a threatening device or a guardian amongst the city.”

MARISHA: Oh! So the duergar–

LAURA: Have basilisks.

MARISHA: –have this as, like, their pets?

MATT: “A trained beast, yes.”

LIAM: Why do you suppose they used it on one of their own?

MATT: “I can only imagine maybe this transpired before the union and is left as a warning.”

LIAM: So it's a duergar pet?

LAURA: Do we remember how to take care of basilisks? Like, do we not look at them, is that how they don't–

LIAM: Don't look at them. That's correct.

LAURA: Don't look them in the eye? Or don't look at their face?

LIAM: Yes, that's it. It's a vision thing.

LAURA: Yes?

TALIESIN: Yes, I believe it's vision based.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: This would be a nature check.

TALIESIN: Double check.

MATT: For anyone who wishes to make one.

MARISHA: I'll do that.

TRAVIS: Me too.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: 23. Natural 20.

LAURA: Oh, well, never mind. He's got it.

ORION: Very good, yay!

MARISHA: Oh, well, I'll stop there.

TRAVIS: Just go ahead and dunk on everybody, why don't you?

MATT: Natural 20. Essentially it is a sight-based circumstance.

TALIESIN: It's entirely visual. They have to catch your gaze and then that is how they can turn you into stone. Otherwise, as long as you don't catch their gaze, you'll be fine.

LAURA: All right.

LIAM: All right. It's a good thing we've all been watching Daredevil last week.

TRAVIS: So, look them in the eye? Got it.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Yes! Very helpful.

TRAVIS: Let's go.

MARISHA: Poor basilisks. Can never make eye contact.

SAM: We're going on?

TRAVIS: Yeah!

LAURA: Yeah, let's keep going.

MATT: As you guys push forward, Clarota lags behind a little bit to inspect the statue. Kind of looks it over for a second–

LAURA: Did you know him?

MATT: (low, breathy voice) “Uh…”

SAM: Dave.

MATT: (laughing) Goddamn it!

(all laugh)

ORION: I don't think his name was Dave, Scanlan.

MATT: He takes a moment to look over and you can see his eyes close slightly for a second. (raspy, breathy voice) “Aye, we've met. Not the kindest of my people, but, nevertheless, should all this pass, I would like to, maybe, release him from this stony prison.”

LAURA: So you know how to do that?

MATT: “I know not, but it can be done. I've seen it.”

LAURA: Didn't we do that?

ORION: Yes.

LAURA: Didn't we have to do that?

LIAM: We sprinkled some of its blood on your eyes, if I remember correctly.

ORION: Yes!

LAURA: I turned to stone?

MATT: You did.

LIAM: You did. I was very sad.

ORION: Yes, that's correct. We used the blood of the creature.

LAURA: I remember, I remember. Yeah, I remember that.

MATT: Essentially, there is a liquid that can be distilled from the basilisk blood.

LAURA: Okay.

TRAVIS: We don't have any more of that.

MATT: You do not.

LAURA: Okay. So we'll be careful.

TRAVIS: Dragon blood for fucking days.

LIAM: We also don't know if it's a basilisk.

SAM: Should we move this statue off to a safe place, inside or anything?

LAURA: Nah, fuck it.

SAM: It's fine here, it's fine.

LIAM: No, it's heavy.

LAURA: Let's just keep going.

MARISHA: It's been there for a while.

TALIESIN: Let's not give anybody any indication we've been here.

LAURA: It's got bat poo on it, let's keep going.

SAM: Okay.

MATT: As you guys press forward, about another 20 or so minutes, you now have a much better view of the left side of Emberhold proper. And you can see the large magma fall that is pouring over the top of the fortress's second story and completely encompasses that side. It splits and divides towards the center - a larger fall towards the front of the fortress and a thinner one towards the very back.

LAURA: (whispering) Thin one! Thin one!

TRAVIS: Yeah, let's go towards the door.

LIAM: All right, creeping back.

LAURA: Yeah! Creepy, creepy, creepy towards the thin one.

LIAM: The creeps are creeping.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: We're in stealth, still, or…?

TRAVIS: Yeah, we're all stealthed.

MATT: For you, it'd be stealth. Yeah, you guys are all stealthed still.

LAURA: Okay.

MARISHA: We're rolling again?

LIAM: 26.

LAURA: You don't to need check it again, he didn't tell us to.

LIAM: Oh. Well, I said I wanted to go back and look.

LAURA: Oh.

MATT: So you move ahead of the rest of the group and head to the front of this stream. And you can see the smooth wall with molten rock pouring down the side, and you can see where portions of the stone have been gradually worn and melted by just the contact, but then built upon by more and more cooled rock. This is a very weird clustered framing of cooled rock around this fall. You see no doorway, as the actual magma is pressing directly against the side of the stronghold.

LIAM: Right, I want to see if I can tell if anything - I know this all looks natural, but perhaps something is fashioned to look such. I want to see if I can figure that out.

MATT: Okay. Go ahead and make an investigate check.

LIAM: Uh, lalalala. 18.

MATT: 18? Best that you can find, looking around, you cannot see anything before you, any sort of mechanism, any sort of any button, any sort of lever, or additional doorway. It's just a solid wall, with the two magma flows.

LIAM: All right. I double back for the Underdark expert and I bring my sister up.

LAURA: Right, right, right. Can I come up and look and see if I can see any tracking? If there's any footprints around a certain area around this.

LIAM: See if you can find a false door or something.

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: All right. Go ahead and make an investigate check.

LIAM: Do it. Do it.

MARISHA: Wait, I thought it was behind–

LIAM: No!

LAURA: It's okay, no, no, no! I get an advantage.

LIAM: It was a one.

LAURA: Shush.

LIAM: All right. That's not a one.

MARISHA: (laughs)

LAURA: Is it investigation?

LIAM: Yes.

LAURA: 22.

MATT: Okay. Looking at this, the side of this fortress, you can see what amounts to a very, very slight raise in the smooth flow of magma. It seems to pour down most of the stronghold and then slightly bulge out, and then it pools, and you can now have a better, closer so you see where it runs off to. It continues into a stream following the edge of the giant cavern wall that's curving down and to the left into a far deeper cavern. You can see the entire cavern, almost like a giant U. It's open, and the entire thing banks around it and goes deeper still. You guys have made it to the far back wall.

LAURA: (gasps, sighs)

MATT: Ah, the chicken has arrived.

SAM: (laughs) Metaphorically…

MATT: Metaphorically, and actually. But from what you can see there is a slight raise beneath the magma.

LAURA: Okay. Does it look like it's safe to bring everybody up here or does it seem like anything's around that could see us? Anything looking from above?

MATT: You glance up and you can see there are two duergar perched up on the edge of the first floor, right on the parapet. You can see there's all this jagged, obsidian stone, almost teeth, sticking out of the very top edge of the wall. And you see the patrols just walking, keeping an eye out. They have crossbows on their arms. A couple of others just have javelins at the side. And they're just doing slow patrols.

LAURA: Okay.

SAM: We need to 007–

LAURA: We're going to have to be super–

SAM: We're going to have to 007 sniper them out.

LAURA: Yeah.

MARISHA: I can handle this, I think.

LAURA: You can?

MARISHA: I think I can get us into that trap door.

SAM: I think you're right.

LAURA: Do you have something that can pull it towards you?

SAM: No no no, can you redirect the magma flow around that bulge with your - can't you, move rocks or–

MARISHA: I can.

SAM: So you can create a like a little lip for it to go around?

LAURA: Ooh…

MARISHA: I was thinking I could either do - that's not a bad idea, or I could - That's actually not a bad idea.

(all laugh)

MATT: (singing) That's fucking teamwork.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Or I could, or I was thinking I could cool off the magma and we could break it.

LAURA: Oh yeah, maybe you can move it away, and then cool it.

LIAM: That sounds kind of noisy.

MARISHA: Well…

SAM: First we've got to take care of the guys on the roof. Are they back with us, or are they still stealthing in front?

MATT: They're still stealthing in front, and you guys have come back to the group?

LAURA: Yeah, I guess we came back to the group and told them about what's going on.

SAM: Okay. We can - me and Pike - can take out the guys on the roof.

LAURA: Oh really?

TRAVIS: Yeah! Do it!

ASHLEY: You want to give it a go?

LAURA: Wait, but he's got sneak attack.

LIAM: Yeah, I'm thinking that Keyleth should–

LAURA: Yeah but we could–

SAM: Yeah, but they're a good 200 feet up.

LIAM: –bird out and drop me.

LAURA: If Keyleth can bird up or you could go over on the flying carpet or something.

SAM: I can take Pike and we can do it.

LAURA: Oh my god.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Are they are they unable to be shot out? Can you not arrow them out?

LAURA: I can try to arrow them out too.

MARISHA: How high are they?

LIAM: She can get a hit or two, but the chances that she could take them both out at once…

LAURA: Maybe you should go up and I'll arrow one and you…

TRAVIS: Why don't you let the little people have some fun?

MARISHA: I'm just afraid if you go up there, that you're going to alarm yourself to other people.

TALIESIN: How loud is it down there? Is the lava flow making noise?

MATT: Very subtle pops and hisses, but other than that it's pretty quiet.

TALIESIN: Not like the roaring sound of a waterfall.

MATT: No, no, it's a slow gradual pour.

TALIESIN: Does anybody have a “mute” spell of some kind?

SAM: Mute, as in silence noise, or a person?

LAURA: I mean, Pass Without Trace, there's silence?

TALIESIN: Yes, as in silence noise.

ASHLEY: Wait!

SAM: No, not me.

TALIESIN: Damn it.

ASHLEY: I have - okay wait.

MATT: David Norris? Thank you David Norris for the chicken!

ALL: Thank you David Norris!

LAURA: The chicken is delicious!

ORION: I love chicken.

LIAM: Dave, the illithids have it. Thank you, Dave.

LAURA: I'm just not going to let you see me eat it.

LIAM: Oh my god, her mouth opens up and tentacles come out and -

ORION: It's really scary.

MARISHA: Sorry, what are we doing?

MATT: It's a good question. What are you doing?

SAM: We gotta take out the fuckers on the roof.

LAURA: Right.

SAM: Do you want to try to shoot them out? Or do you want me to take Pike and fuck their shit up?

TRAVIS: Do that.

LAURA: I mean, if you can flip them off the roof that would be awesome.

SAM: That's what we're going to do.

LAURA: Okay, then do it.

LIAM: Wait, can we see anyone else?

ASHLEY: We're just going to fling them off of the roof?

LIAM: Can I see duergar from any other perch?

TRAVIS: Yep, pressure's on!

MATT: From your current position, you're up against the wall, no.

LIAM: No? All right.

MATT: You can back away and take up more of a case on it if you want.

MARISHA: I mean if I took eagle form I could drop you and then I could just pick one up with my eagle talons and in the lava they go.

LIAM: This seems dangerous and reckless.

MARISHA: It does seem very dangerous and reckless.

LIAM: Let's do it?

ASHLEY: What if it brings attention?

LIAM: Who gives a shit?

MARISHA: I'm keeping my Pass Without A Trace up.

LAURA: We'll just have to be fast. Be really speedy.

ORION: Can they see down to where we are? Does it just keep going?

MARISHA: I'm going with you guys.

TRAVIS: It's been over an hour, we've killed nothing, we'll kill these fucks!

MATT: So far only the two of them have really approached the stronghold and you guys have stayed back behind the elevations.

TRAVIS: I'm a vampire. I need blood.

MATT: So you can all try, in theory, if you want to just stealth past them.

MARISHA: Wait, what?

SAM: Here's my plan.

LAURA: Okay!

ORION: We're not with them.

MARISHA: Yeah we are, we are.

SAM: I take Pike up there. We knock those fuckers off, super easy.

TRAVIS: Yep.

SAM: Grog runs out and brains them the second they hit the ground.

TRAVIS: I approve of this plan.

LIAM: Or fall in the lava. You just gotta shove them.

LAURA: Yeah, they'll fall in the lava pit, just shove them off the side.

SAM: Maybe. I don't know where they're going to fall.

LAURA: Well, just do it.

MARISHA: Well, if they miss they miss the lava pit, we've got Grog.

ORION: Can I just say right now–

LAURA: Just be ready to let us know if you need help.

ORION: –I'm going to be reading this book.

MARISHA: Eagle form.

LIAM: I'm hanging by Keyleth in case shit goes south.

LAURA: Oh my god this is so stupid.

LIAM: Then we're going up, right?

MARISHA: Jump on my back.

SAM: What you got, Pike?

LIAM: Yeah, girl.

LAURA: Give me the flying carpet just in case I need to fly.

MARISHA: Or I can give you a ride.

SAM: I can get you up there. What can you do when we're up there?

ASHLEY: There's something I've been wanting to do.

SAM: Yeah!

TRAVIS: What do you say?

ORION: Oh my word, this is fascinating!

LAURA: We're doing it!

TRAVIS: But what do you say to get the magic carpet?

LAURA: Please can I have the magic carpet?

SAM: I'm going to just look at the guard's pattern of movement. Are they staying in position, or are they walking around? Are they talking to each other at all?

TRAVIS: Ooh, good question.

MATT: As you watch, you take a moment, still from the far back position, watch the two up there come together; they chat for a second, then a third one appears.

SAM: Oh shit.

MATT: Then one of them rotates out for the one that just arrived.

ASHLEY: They were switching shifts.

MATT: They both just sit there, keeping an eye. One of them cleans his bow.

SAM: Are they close to each other?

MATT: They're about twenty feet from each other along the top of the parapet.

TRAVIS: There's three? There's three, not two?

SAM: You said twenty feet?

MATT: Twenty feet, yes.

TRAVIS: There's three up there?

TALIESIN: Now there's three.

MATT: Two.

SAM: No no, one came to swap out the other.

LAURA: Oh my gosh.

TRAVIS: I'm just saying, I have been known to climb a few things in my time, if you need an extra.

ASHLEY: All right, let's do it.

MARISHA: Are you coming too, Pike?

ASHLEY: Yeah! I'm a-coming up there to kill some - some things.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Do you have any climbing gear or anything?

ASHLEY: I have a grappling hook.

LIAM: The ocean has changed you.

LAURA: Oh my god. This is stupid.

SAM: Okay, they're standing twenty feet apart?

MATT: Yeah.

TALIESIN: I'm going to watch this all go down with Bad News.

SAM: Radius? 15 feet?

LAURA: Yeah, me and you get ready to shoot.

TALIESIN: I'm waiting in case–

SAM: Is the range a radius?

MARISHA: So wait, who's all going?

TRAVIS: Just those two.

MATT: No, range is how far away from you they are, and the radius is for the point of the spell.

SAM: No, I mean a range of a spell, is how far from me?

MARISHA: Just those two?

TRAVIS: Scanlan and Pike.

LAURA: And you're going to bring them up if you can.

MATT: Yes.

SAM: Got it. We're good.

LIAM: Are they carpeting up? How are you going up?

MARISHA: Are you guys going to fly on me?

LAURA: They'll fly on Keyleth.

LIAM: Scanlan, how are you guys going up? Eagle? Carpet?

SAM: No.

LAURA: Eagle.

LIAM: What?

TRAVIS: You're climbing that shit, aren't you?

SAM: I can get there like that. We're good.

TRAVIS: Cliffhanger. Beautiful.

LIAM: Do it, Tom Cruise.

LAURA: All right, do it. Mission Impossible.

SAM: All right. You ready? Do you know what you're going to do up there?

ASHLEY: Not really, but let's just wing it!

SAM: I'm going to try to knock them both off in one blow, but if I miss, you gotta take one.

LAURA: You can charge them off if you want.

ASHLEY: Okay. all right. I can take one if you can take one.

TRAVIS: You've got a morningstar.

SAM: Okay.

ASHLEY: All right.

TRAVIS: Morningstar to the taint.

SAM: Grog, you ready to kill?

TRAVIS: Yeah, oh yeah!

LAURA: Be really quiet while you're fighting, try to take them out before they–

TALIESIN: This is awesome and nothing is going to go wrong.

MARISHA: Why are we using the gnomes to throw people over?

ORION: I can't believe how they wrote this.

SAM: We're little people! You know why? Because I need someone with me and I can only take her, because that's the only other one who will fit through the Dimension Door with me.

LAURA: Go!

ASHLEY: The Dimension Door?

SAM: Yes, we're going to go through a Dimension Door. I can take one person of my height or smaller.

MATT: All right.

SAM: So I will take Pike.

LIAM: Portal, motherfucker!

MATT: You reach over and hold on to Pike gently, give her a little wink. And suddenly–

SAM: We're going to try to appear between the two of them. Exactly between the two of them.

MATT: Okay. You feel the sudden rush of air and the surrounding atmosphere of you goes from that uncomfortable warmth to a sudden freezing cold as your vision goes black and all you can see is Scanlan looking at you with this heightened grin as he's muttering these arcane incantations under his breath. An instant later, you guys are both standing at the top of the wall, with both of the duergar, one kind of facing away, one looking really surprised at the fact that you guys both appeared there. You have a surprise round. What are you doing?

SAM: I cast Thunderwave and blast out from where I'm standing between them, 15 feet in either direction.

LAURA: (whispering) That's so loud!

MARISHA: Isn't that loud?

SAM: So, 10 feet and 10 feet away from me.

MATT: Okay. What's your save?

SAM: Uh, 19.

LIAM: But a quiet Thunderwave, right?

MATT: 19, all right.

LAURA: A really quiet Thunderwave.

ORION: Thunderclap is loud. Thunderwave is different.

LAURA: Oh, okay.

MARISHA: But I'm pretty sure it's still thunder.

MATT: Thunderwave, looking it up real fast just to make sure of the situation.

TRAVIS: I like this plan.

ORION: Thunder makes a noise right?

LIAM: (singing) This is a triumph.

ASHLEY: (singing) I'm making a note here.

SEVERAL: (singing) Huge success.

(all laugh)

MATT: Here we go.

SAM: I don't think it's loud.

LIAM: We're total fake geeks, all of us.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Such fake geeks.

SAM: Oh no - well, it's a wave of thunderous force, but it doesn't say sound. It just says thunderous force.

MATT: I would say thunderous force isn't a thunderclap,but it will make some noise.

SAM: Okay, fine.

MATT: So keep that in mind.

LAURA: Keyleth, fly up and cast Pass Without Trace on them.

MATT: So, as you guys appear, you release Pike, you bring your arms up and slam your arms in a downward motion. As you do, there is a dull flash of light and a (boom noise) burst sound emanates from you.

ORION: I say, “Ooh, light.”

MATT: Both of the duergar, the one who sees you, who is bringing us his crossbow to fire, gets impacted and blown off the side of the wall. The one facing away gets blown up towards, slams into the side of the wall, right at the edge, and then topples over the side, both plummeting over.

LIAM: Wilhelm scream!

ASHLEY: Oh!

MATT: Brief Wilhelm scream. You're standing there, you watch this happen.

ASHLEY: I didn't have to do anything, Scanlan!

SAM: Make out with me!

(all laugh)

SAM: We're alone, it's super romantic. I just killed two fuckers! Come on! It's now or never, baby!

TRAVIS: (singing) I think we're alone now!

ASHLEY & TRAVIS: (singing) Doesn't seem to be anyone around!

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Well, let's just wait until we're out of danger.

MARISHA: Yeah, it's getting real romantic real quick, Scanlan.

SAM: Wait?

ASHLEY: But that was really hot!

SAM: It was really hot, right? Come on!

ASHLEY: It was.

SAM: Just a little something something?

ASHLEY: Let's just–

MARISHA: So sexy.

MATT: As this is happening, both of the duergar come plummeting off the side of the wall.

LIAM: Friendzoned.

MATT: One manages to kind of loosely break his fall but the full 25 foot fall - he takes–

LAURA: Get ready.

LIAM: Come on, Grog.

TRAVIS: I rage!

(all laugh)

MATT: There's one that lands just to the side of the magma pool that's forming. He took some damage and is like (pained gasps) trying to get back up. He fell hard on one arm. The other one that's further away from the magma, the one that saw you, managed to reduce his damage a little bit because it was aware at least you were there.

SAM: We have to kill these fuckers.

MATT: Looks like it took some damage, but not too much. It's maybe 10 feet from you.

TRAVIS: (eager laugh)

MATT: As he's trying to get back up, he looks up and sees you charging towards him, Grog, raging. Go ahead and make your two attacks.

LAURA: Yes!

TRAVIS: (roars) 19.

MATT: 19 hits.

TRAVIS: Nice. And 19 again!

MATT: Both hit. Go ahead and roll damage.

LIAM: I'm going to get some duergar!

TRAVIS: 17 and 19.

MATT: So as he gets up, (grunt) he goes back for his warhammer. Before he gets a chance to, you cleave off one arm and send the axe right into the center of his torso, silencing him in an instant. He slightly spreads at the wound. (choking sound) This gurgling sound, and you just have to kick him off the edge of your axe.

TRAVIS: I tilt him towards the pillar to spray the pillar with his gore. Look, I can make one too! Ha ha!

(all laugh)

MARISHA: I run across to the other one and Thorn Whip him from across the lava pool.

MATT: You have to jump over the lava to do that because he's on the side you guys are on.

MARISHA: Oh. Well then, is there anyone on the other side?

ASHLEY: Is he already dying, or no? He's in the lava?

MARISHA: He's on the same side as me?

MATT: He's on the same side as you.

SAM: He's hurt.

LAURA: We run up and kick him into the lava!

MARISHA: Is he standing up or…yeah!

MATT: He's in the process of standing up, yeah.

LAURA: Can we just run up and kick him into the lava?

MARISHA: Yeah, can I just run and push?

MATT: (laughs) Okay, all right, so…

LIAM: I use pushing attack!

TRAVIS: (grunts) Hunh!

MARISHA: (grunts) Hunh!

SAM: (high voice) I'm sorry!

MARISHA: (laughing) Yes, exactly!

(all laugh)

MATT: All right, so go ahead and roll athletics.

MARISHA: This is the meanest thing I've ever done!

LIAM & MATT: (laugh)

LAURA: No, no, remember you killed that kid one time.

MARISHA: Oh, thanks for bringing that up, Vax!

(all laugh)

LAURA: I'm Vex, he's Vax!

TRAVIS: That's some dark shit! That's some dark shit!

MARISHA: Oh, I thought it was Vex and Vax. Every time I get confused.

MATT: (laughing) It's a long story!

ASHLEY: Oh my god. Remember you killed that kid one time?

LIAM: Two and a half years in and Keyleth has just learned our names.

MARISHA: I get them confused.

SAM: I do too. All the time.

SEVERAL: All the time.

MARISHA: See, no one else has any idea!

ORION: I have your names written down!

LIAM: I'm Vex, okay? It's simple!

SAM: No, no! That is not true!

LAURA: No, no, don't do that. He's lying.

MARISHA: (laughing) Two years, and I just don't.

MATT: So, as the terrible blood spray occurs across the nearby pillar on Grog's side, the other duergar is getting up with his crossbow, trying to get it ready. You rush forward. Go ahead and roll athletics.

MARISHA: Oh!

ASHLEY: Come on!

LAURA: Oh no!

ORION: As she does this, I notice everything, and I sit down.

MARISHA: This is for that kid!

ORION: And turn to the next chapter in my book.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: (singing) He had it coming, he had it coming.

ASHLEY: This is quite a good read!

MARISHA: It could be worse. 14.

MATT: That's okay. He rolled a one.

LAURA: Ooh! Yes!

MATT: So, as the duergar is getting up, he goes - (grunt) You just run up and - boom! And he falls back - (hissing SFX) (screams) - and starts giving a horrible, painful scream as he's essentially flailing in the magma, melting.

ASHLEY: Someone shoot him in the mouth.

MARISHA: I say, shh! Shh! Shh! And I wind down to push him under the lava!

ASHLEY: Oh, this is brutal!

ORION: That's not what it's called.

MATT: Okay. So, as he's screaming your Wind Wall shoves him further under the magma as he's screaming, cooling the magma around him as the rock (cracking SFX) cracks around him, turning into black rock–

MARISHA: I'm sorry! I'm sorry!

MATT: –his face still visible over the surface, going (choking SFX) in this horrible, almost Han-in-carbonite type of look at the top of the magma pool.

LAURA: Keyleth!

LIAM: You just one-upped Grog, man.

TRAVIS: That was awesome!

MATT: As fresh magma now begins to pool over the cool, covering his face, you step away.

SAM: Piss on the body!

TRAVIS: I never knew you were an artist.

MARISHA: (laughs nervously)

MATT: However, the subtle sound of the Thunderwave and then the horrible screams of pain, you can hear footsteps coming toward the wall edge where both you and Pike are currently on. What are you going to do?

LAURA: Run! Or can you turn yourselves into duergar?

SAM: Is there a door or something?

MATT: Not from your current position, no. You're just on a five foot ledge of the second story.

SAM: Of the fortress. Oh, it's not a standalone tower. It's part of a larger wall.

ASHLEY: How far of a jump down is it?

MATT: It's about 25 feet.

LAURA: What, am I too excited about it? Turn yourself into a duergar! Make it seem like everything's okay!

ASHLEY: Should we call Grog?

SAM: No, I'll do the same thing to get us down.

ASHLEY: Oh yeah, Dimension Door!

SAM: Unless you want to stay and fight.

MATT: You've got 20 seconds.

MARISHA: Wait, what's happening?

ASHLEY: We could try to stay and fight?

LIAM: Turn into a duergar! (cawing sounds)

LAURA: Turn into a duergar! Act like you're a duergar! Say everything's okay!

ASHLEY: Turn into a duergar?

SAM: Should we get out of here?

ASHLEY: Yeah, let's get out.

SAM: Okay, we're going to Dimension Door out.

MATT: Okay. So you grab her, (magic SFX) back down to the bottom.

TRAVIS: Cast that shit.

MATT: They reappear at the bottom.

ORION: Are you done?

MARISHA: Okay, I cast Wall of Stone, but right over top of where I see that lip. But I don't want to bring it out far. Just like, halfsies.

SAM: (laughs) Just the tip.

MARISHA: Just the tip.

ASHLEY: Does it stop the magma?

MATT: As you guys appear at the bottom–

MARISHA: So it goes like magma flow, here's the wall, I want it to go - (grinding noise)

MATT: –you guys hear footprints along the wall. They don't seem to have seen you yet. At which point there's this (grinding and thump sounds) sound of shifting rock. A giant stone wall juts out the side of the fortress right where the lava pool was pouring over the side. As it does, the lava pools on top of the wall and is offset, leaving a small gap where you guys can try to squeeze through. You can see, right underneath where it was, there is a stone doorway. It does not appear to have a handle or anything, it's just a stone door.

SAM: How do we get in?

LIAM: Tiberius, fly up there quick.

ORION: What?

LIAM: Stop eating chicken and fly up to that door.

ORION: Oh.

ASHLEY: Where did you get that chicken?

ORION: What's going on?

LIAM: There's a magic doorway up there, I don't see any handles or anything.

MATT: It's right underneath the lava.

LIAM: Oh, it's on the ground?

MATT: Basically she put the stone wall out. It pours off.

ORION: It's right there! What are you talking about?

LIAM: I walk up to it and take a look.

LAURA: Oh yeah, that was good. Maybe Grog can push it!

ORION: I'm going to do an Arcana check.

LIAM: Do I have advantage?

MATT: Uh, no.

LAURA: Can Grog push it?

LIAM: All right, take a look, dude.

TRAVIS: No, he's doing an arcana check.

SAM: Grog, just kill it!

MARISHA: (laughing) Go kill it, just punch the door!

ORION: 22.

MATT: 22? As you guys are inspecting this, in the time you've taken to do this, both the duergar up on top have seen you, and are both taking shots at you.

SAM: Oh shit.

TALIESIN: I was waiting for that anyways so, I'm going to–

MARISHA: He was waiting.

MATT: As they appear on the top, you guys who have your arrow and gun at the ready, both take a shot then they get a retribution shot.

LIAM: Keyleth!

MARISHA: What?

LIAM: Let's go up!

MARISHA: Go up?

LIAM: Up to them, quick.

MARISHA: I want see how they fare.

LIAM: That's going to be about six seconds.

MATT: The door is not magical. It is a mechanism of some kind.

LAURA: 65. Oh, 65? (laughter) Shit.

SAM: I rolled a 65.

LIAM: 65? Holy shit you're a deity!

LAURA: I'm amazing!

ORION: Vax. Pay attention, the door mechanical, it is not magical. That's how we open it.

LAURA: 25.

MATT: 25. Percy? And you get two attacks each. So - (zipping SFX)

TALIESIN: I hit a 23.

MATT: 23 hits. Go ahead and roll second attack.

TALIESIN: Okay, roll damage.

MATT: Well, roll both attacks first.

LAURA: 18 for the second one.

MATT: Hits as well.

TALIESIN: I have to reload with my second attack.

MATT: Oh right. Is this with the Bad News?

TALIESIN: I've got the big gun out.

MATT: You've got the Bad News out. Okay then, yeah. So you fire and then reload. Go ahead and roll damage.

LAURA: I'm using my fire bow.

MATT: You're using the fire bowstring. As you nock your first arrow, (swoosh sound) it bursts into flame as it hits your fingers.

TALIESIN: Oh my god.

MARISHA: (dejected groan)

TALIESIN: Seven damage.

MATT: Seven damage? Okay.

TALIESIN: I'm so embarrassed.

MATT: I'm sorry.

LIAM: (gunshot sound) You got me right in the ear.

LAURA: 20 damage on the first attack.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: Come on, Vex.

LAURA: 13 on the second.

MATT: Okay, as both are going up with their crossbows ready to go, first one, Bad News - (gunshot sound) - with a cacophonous echoing gunshot that within this cavern, definitely carries some sound to it. And to some degree, suprise may be a little harder to find going forward.

TALIESIN: They were ready to start shooting at us.

MATT: However, the shot hits the guy in the shoulder, knocks him off balance for a second. Not enough of a wound to prevent his next action. You, however, place one arrow into the other guy's shoulder. He's dropped the crossbow. As he goes to reach for his other weapon, the other one just, right at the bottom of his throat, out the back of his head, and he just drops below the wall.

ASHLEY: Awesome.

MATT: The other one does get a crossbow shot off at you, Percy. That is a 23 versus armor class.

TALIESIN: That hits.

MATT: You take nine points of piercing damage. As the bolt just streaks you across the front of your torso. Passes through, thankfully, but you do feel there is a wound that's slowly turning warmer beneath your armor.

LAURA: Can I shoot at the other one?

MATT: That's been the round. Now, you guys have been inspecting the door. The door is not magical. There is some sort of contraption that opens it from the inside.

LIAM: I'm getting my picks out, seeing if I can figure out some way to–

MATT: Go ahead and make a check with your thieves' tools.

LIAM: 29.

MATT: A 29. You take a second and you find that the contraption that holds this door in place definitely is on the other side. It's a series of winches and a chain pull. You find that there is one slight gap where you manage to hook one of the chains, pull it out ever so slightly, and you know with a strong yank from a strong person, you could probably pull it out from the outside.

ORION: Grog!

TRAVIS: Sounds like we need a strong person.

LIAM: So this is the part where I ask Grog over to pull. Grog, grab this–

ASHLEY: I'll do it! I'll do it.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Yeah, me and Pike are on this.

ASHLEY: I'll assist.

MATT: Grog, you reach over and grab the chain, and Pike grabs onto the back of you and you both pull.

TRAVIS: Give it a good heave-ho.

MATT: Go ahead and make a strength check with advantage.

TRAVIS: Oh yeah, 23.

MATT: 23. As you pull, you hear the grinding of this chain against the stone, (cracking SFX) and you can see the actual door begin to rise upward this way.

SAM: It's a Delorean.

MATT: Essentially. When it opens up, it moves the magma out of the way. That's how this construct is used as an exit. It's what I mentioned before. This is supposed to be an exit for the royal individuals of the stronghold. It only opens part way, however, because the stone wall currently blocks the rest of its movement. However, you can still move through it.

LIAM: We can't leave this duergar behind though, we gotta take him out.

MATT: Yes, there is one duergar still there. So that's been all of your guys' actions. We're bringing it back. Pike, you haven't gone yet.

ASHLEY: Okay.

MATT: Keyleth you've gone, so the only one left to take an action is–

MARISHA: Tiberius, have you gone?

MATT: Yeah, he checked the doorway.

MARISHA: Oh right.

ASHLEY: Where's he at?

MATT: He's up on top of the wall, about 25 feet from you.

ASHLEY: I want to create a spiritual weapon, like a poisonous lasso, and (whiff SFX) and then put him down into the lava.

MATT: Huh. Sure.

(all laugh)

SAM: A lariat of truth?

TRAVIS: That's awesome.

TALIESIN: Well, all right then.

MATT: So using your spiritual weapon, you take a moment, you grasp your Sarenrae holy symbol around your neck, and as you pull your hand away from the symbol you see this glowing celestial rope extends out of nowhere. You begin to spin your fingers, and on its own, it begins to swirl and swirl. You then throw your hand forward and on its own, it cascades upward toward the edge of the wall. Go ahead and roll an attack roll.

ASHLEY: An attack roll? Which is?

MATT: Using your spell modifier as the attack bonus.

ASHLEY: 10.

SAM: Ooh. That ain't gonna do it.

MATT: Total of 10?

ASHLEY: I think so.

(all laugh)

MATT: What'd you roll?

ASHLEY: I rolled a two, and then I have a plus eight.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: That ain't no good.

LIAM: It was a good idea though.

LAURA: It was such a good idea.

MATT: The celestial lasso, which you don't get the feeling poison is something you could really muster based on your deity's central good–

ASHLEY: I was just kidding! I was just getting a little crazy with ideas.

MATT: I like it. However, as it heads over the wall, you see it does not find purchase on the duergar. It instead finds purchase on part of the wall.

ASHLEY: Fuck.

TRAVIS: Poisoning the wall effectively.

MATT: Yes, it is now a poisoned property.

ASHLEY: (laughs) Poisoning that wall, effectively. Gosh dang it. That would have been cool.

MATT: That would have been cool, unfortunate bad roll.

TRAVIS: It was going to be pretty cool.

LIAM: Remember it for the future though.

MATT: That brings us to the top of the round order. I believe at the top we have–

SAM: Mister Me?

MATT: Yes, Scanlan.

SAM: Okay. Boy, oh boy. We're still trying to get that fucker up on the roof right?

LIAM: Yes, he's going to run and tell people.

SAM: I've got almost nothing. So I'll just - can I summon an Unseen Servant to push him?

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Oh yeah, that's a good idea.

MATT: We can give it a shot.

TRAVIS: Roll high. Roll really high.

SAM: I don't have any ranged weapons.

LAURA: Natural 20!

MATT: So you conjure Unseen Servant. Mark off your spell use.

ORION: I look up and go, “Ooh, It's Monty's cousin.”

MATT: You see a slight shimmer of ethereal energy behind the duergar. It's going to attempt to shove him. It isn't, unfortunately, on its own, extremely strong. It's mainly meant as an aide. However, it is possible. Go ahead and make an athletics check. Not your athletics, just make a d20 roll.

SAM: Just a normal athletics.

LIAM: Come on, 20.

SAM: Yeah, I mean it's a five, so.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: What's your athletics? We're really rolling well tonight.

MATT: You hear a (ting) sound as the duergar's armor is given a hefty slap, but no apparent force is placed upon its body.

ORION: A hefty slap.

SAM: Thank you, Jarvis!

(all laugh)

SAM: But is he confused?

MATT: A little bit, but not enough to not be loading his crossbow for a second shot.

SAM: Damn it!

MATT: Good thinking on that point.

MARISHA: We're a party of seven people just like, “Aw, damn it, you!“

TALIESIN: Like a cat in a tree, just - (beckoning whistle)

SAM: And I'm going to just give a little inspiration to Vax. That's Laura, obviously.

(all laugh)

LAURA: Yes, thank you.

MARISHA: It inverted. That's what I always get mixed.

MATT: All right, a d8 inspiration die to you as Scanlan hums a little tune under his breath.

LAURA: Nice.

SAM: (hums Dueling Banjos)

MATT: You're up.

LAURA: Oh! I attack him.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: Pew pew.

ASHLEY: Pew pew!

LAURA: It's good.

LIAM: It's a one.

MARISHA: Damn it! What is wrong with us?

TRAVIS: What in the hot and holy shit is happening right now?

ASHLEY: What are we doing?

MATT: That's your first attack?

LAURA: My first attack is a serious fail. My second attack, though, is a 25.

MATT: That hits.

MARISHA: That's pretty cool.

MATT: So the first one you pull back, and as you pull back the actual arrow snaps.

LIAM: You almost shot me!

LAURA: Ow, that hurt my arm so bad.

MATT: Yeah, you're gonna have a little rash there probably tomorrow.

LAURA: Great. eight.

MATT: Eight damage, all right. Your second arrow manages to find its mark. As it sticks pretty close to where the first arrow hit, or where he was shot from the Bad News. The duergar just shrugs it off angrily, and aims his crossbow from once on Percy, now onto you.

LAURA: (nervously) Haha.

MATT: It's getting its shot at you. That is a 17 versus armor class.

LAURA: Nope.

MATT: Nope?

LAURA: Nope.

MATT: You manage to just dodge out of the way. You hear it whiz past your ear. That brings us to Percy.

TALIESIN: I'll take one more shot at him.

LIAM: Redemption, Percy.

TRAVIS: Come on, buddy.

SAM: Kill this guy.

ASHLEY: Get it.

SAM: He's lasted longer than most of the people we fight.

MARISHA: (laughing) Yeah he has.

TALIESIN: 18?

MATT: 18 hits.

TALIESIN: Come on die.

TRAVIS: Come on, Percy.

LIAM: Right in the belly button.

MARISHA: Oh, that's nice. That's pretty.

TALIESIN: That's 25 points of damage.

TRAVIS: Thank you!

LAURA: Yes!

MATT: With a second (click), you pull out one of your custom made, nasty looking bullets, load it back into Bad News. You pull it back, aim up, and fire. And once again, you guys are seeing this weapon up close again. With each fire, it takes all of his physical body to not get blown off his feet with each time it fires.

LAURA: That's badass, Percy.

MATT: (thunder crack) A plume of white and ash-like smoke comes shooting out the side of the weapon. Nearby, you almost have to close your ears instinctually from the loudness of the shot. However, the duergar at the top of the wall, you see where his head once was just (wet impact SFX) across the wall behind it.

ASHLEY: I love Bad News.

TALIESIN: Let's move quickly.

LAURA: Let's get in the door.

SAM: I think they heard us.

ORION: I go in the door.

TALIESIN: Going in the door.

LAURA: We all go in the door.

MATT: All of you have made your way into the doorway.

LAURA: Can Trinket fit? Trinket can fit.

MATT: Trinket can fit with you, yes.

LIAM: Just barely.

ASHLEY: Just bear-ly.

LIAM: It's like Winnie the Pooh, in the–

LAURA: If Grog can fit, Trinket can fit.

TALIESIN: It's the one you don't suit.

TRAVIS: Oh no, we can't see anything.

MATT: You guys make your way into this tiny little room–

ALL: Whoa!

MATT: You're all very crammed in, to get anywhere.

LAURA: Into this (high voice) teeny-tiny little room.

LIAM: Feels like an intermission room.

LAURA: Oh. A bathroom break room?

LIAM: Yes. We could all relieve ourselves in this room.

MATT: You guys all slowly push into this storage room. It's very musty. It hasn't seen use in quite a while. In fact, you can see a little bit of mold is growing on the side of one of the barrels in the corner.

ORION: Ooh, dank.

MATT: There is a doorway that is closed on the opposite side of this wall, and from what you can see, there is a stairway that curves upwards to the second floor.

LAURA: Ooh!

SAM: Guys, I'm sensing a lot of purple and brown construction paper here.

(all laugh)

ORION: I am as well, Scanlan.

LIAM: That's your favored terrain, right?

SAM: It is.

(all laugh)

LAURA: Can we take an intermission break at this moment?

MATT: I think as you guys just entered the stronghold, we'll take this as an intermission break. So take a little over 10 minutes. We'll watch the rest of the videos here again, and we'll return as the party has just entered the Emberhold itself.
Break

LAURA: All right. Oh wait, quick announcement.

ZAC: A couple quick announcements.

LIAM: Zac matches the construction paper.

LAURA: What?!

MARISHA: You do!

(all laugh)

ZAC: You can't see me! So guys before we go on intermission, I wanted to bring up one more time 826LA which is the charity that Critical Role is supporting. Do you want to give a brief–

MARISHA: Yeah. A portion of our proceeds, or whatever our donations are, go to 826LA. They are an after-school tutoring program that help children between the ages of five and 18, mainly with literacy and creative writing and they have this awesome program where it's a young authors thing. You can buy all their books and their stories, and you should totally check them out.

ZAC: Sweet!

MATT: Fantastic.

ZAC: So guys, we can spam you with that link in the chatroom if you want to support a charity for Critical Role. We also still have a giveaway at 2,150 subs, which is a picture of the entire Critical Role cast they've all signed, and it's really cool. We'll show that to you guys again later, but we'll go ahead and roll those videos for you guys again.

MATT: See if we can squeeze the intro again, that would be best. All right, cool guys, we'll see you again in a little bit.

(character intros)

(drumming battle music)

(drumming battle music continues)
Part II

ORION: Still alive!

MATT: (laughs) Welcome back, guys. Welcome back to Critical Role. And we have Orion – .

LIAM: Holy hell.

TALIESIN: Ow.

MARISHA: Are you okay?

TALIESIN: I'm fine.

MATT: 2d6 damage to Tiberius. So, guys, for those who are keeping up: two things, real fast. We want to thank Jacqueline Lassiter for the awesome food she sent for us.

ALL: (words of acclamation and thanks)

MATT: Seriously, thank you. A delightful, necessary treat after this game time. So, thank you, thank you, thank you. Also for the 2,150-subscriber mark, we're giving away this autographed photo of the cast.

LAURA: Autographed photo.

MATT: We'll send out to you.

LIAM: It's so handsome.

MARISHA: Who is it going to?

MATT: Some lucky person in the chatroom once we hit 2,150.

MARISHA: Oh. We don't know yet.

MATT: Whenever that happens, that will be going to you. So, yes, returning to the game–

SAM: Also, we've got these t-shirts. You should want them.

(Laura and Marisha laugh)

MATT: We're going to now look into–

MARISHA: Yes, let us know if you want them.

LAURA: We're going to look into that.

MATT: We're going to look into possibly finding a way to get these shirts to you guys in the next couple weeks.

MARISHA: Only if you want them, though. This is going to be a lot of work. We don't want to do it unless you really want them.

ORION: We hate doing work.

TRAVIS: We're voice actors.

TALIESIN: We're not here to work.

SAM: Where are we? We were just going in a door.

MATT: Indeed. You guys–

LIAM: Come on. Yes, they want them.

MATT: Cool. I guess that feedback is good. The party had just managed to not-quite-so-stealthily pry their way into the hidden entrance to the outside of the duergar stronghold of Emberhold. They found themselves crammed into a very tiny, essentially a storage room, with a stairway leading up and a closed doorway leading further into the stronghold. So, what is your preference?

LAURA: I think we should go through the door, instead of going up.

LIAM: I agree.

LAURA: Because any prisoners are probably going to be kept at a low level.

TALIESIN: Can we quietly open the door?

MATT: Yeah, once inside.

LAURA: Can we very stealthily try to open - oh, check for traps!

LIAM: Yes, I'm going to sniff the door a bit.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: (sniffing SFX)

LIAM: Yeah, that's a 20.

MATT: 20? Best you can tell, the door itself is locked, but is not trapped.

LIAM: Okay, well - (clinking SFX) Okay, thieves' tools out. Oh, that's an easy 30.

SAM: 30?!

MATT: A 30!

LIAM: 30.

SAM: Jesus.

MARISHA: God damn.

MATT: Which is good because it's a very, very intricate lock. There is a specific key, a single key that is designed for this lock, that you gather is probably held by King Murghol himself.

ASHLEY: King Myrtle?

LAURA: Mairgil. Mare - Mairgil?

MATT: Mur-ghol.

MARISHA: Marigold.

SEVERAL: Murghol.

SAM: And his queen, Durarara.

MATT: (laughs)

MARISHA: Is that how you pronounce her name? Doo-gara-gar?

LIAM: It's, uh, Ermahgerd?

ALL: Ermahgerd.

LAURA: Ulara is her name.

ORION: Kuma.

LAURA: Queen Ulara.

SAM: Ulara. Uhura.

MATT: Yes. Uhura.

MARISHA: Uhura.

TALIESIN: Kana.

MATT: Kumar.

MARISHA: I don't know! What is her name? Seriously, what is her name, now?

LAURA: It's Ulara! Ulara.

SAM: Ulara.

MARISHA: What is – ?

SEVERAL: Ulara.

MARISHA: Ulara. (giggles)

MATT: Shh.

TALIESIN: Maybe not.

MARISHA: Uladra. Right?

LIAM: I'm picking a lock.

LAURA: Shh. He's picking a lock. Be very quiet.

LIAM: (clicking SFX)

MATT: However, you do manage to find a series of intricate, strangely-constructed dwarven tumblers on the inside that each have a very strange, rigid structure – (laughs)

LIAM: 'Ey!

MATT: Please do that every time you pick a lock. You manage to get the right sequence, and with a slight - (clicking SFX) - clicking sound, (squeak SFX) the door opens slightly on the inside.

LAURA: Yes.

LIAM: It was pretty easy.

MATT: Leading into what you can see is a hallway, that continues further down to about there.

LIAM: Where is the door? Where is the door that I just picked?

MATT: The door that you picked, if you wanted to walk through is right there.

LIAM: It's naturally there.

LAURA: So that other stuff is upstairs.

MATT: All of this is on the floor that you're on.

LAURA: Oh! Okay.

LIAM: I'm going to take six or seven quiet steps forward, stealthily. 19 stealth.

MATT: All right.

ORION: As he does this, I'm going to pull out my Ioun stone from my pouch, and let it– (whirling SFX)

MATT: All right, cool.

TRAVIS: We're all trapped in that room together, right?

MATT: You are. Correct.

TRAVIS: I fart.

(all laugh)

ORION: Oh! Grog! Prestidigitation, and I (whoosh SFX) make a quick wind-gust–

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: Just circulate it around the room, will you?

ORION: I blew it away! I could blow it right up your nose, Vax! (fluttering SFX)

TRAVIS: I'm closer to you now than I've ever been before.

LAURA: I throw up in my mouth just a little bit.

TALIESIN: Go around the corner and tell us what you see.

MATT: Just a little bit.

ORION: Oh. I'm sorry.

MATT: (laughs)

TALIESIN: Take a very quiet peek around the corner.

LIAM: All right, I'm having a peeky-poo.

TALIESIN: Quietly.

MATT: As you peek through, you can get a general idea of what looks to be some sort of an empty storage room. A lot of materials have been moved out of it. It looks like the remnants of stone, things that were used for construction that once were in this room that have been pulled out to build things. Possibly moved as part of the war camp to start building some of the siege weapons that you saw above.

LIAM: Do I hear anything?

MATT: Not currently. Roll a perception check.

LIAM: Yes.

LAURA: Oh, that's good.

LIAM: That's pretty good. 27.

MATT: Listening, you hear footsteps above. You hear very, very faintly through the stonework about 20 feet above you - (thumping SFX) - some footsteps moving above. Apparently there is some level of alert on the second floor.

LAURA: Oh, shit. We should move fast.

MARISHA: Hmm. I wonder why.

LIAM: Go figure.

LAURA: We should get out of the room.

ORION: Yes, Percy, I wonder why.

LAURA: We start getting out of the room.

TALIESIN: It's a wonder, looking outside.

LIAM: I go back to the door and just be like–

LAURA: (whispering) Come on. Hurry!

LIAM: So, I want to go further - no doorway, as of yet. Correct?

MATT: No doorway here.

LIAM: If I go this way–

LAURA: They're going to start coming down these fricking stairs in this room.

MATT: This way? It ends. The hallway comes to an end, with a wall.

LIAM: Well then, I'm going to peek into this door here. This open door.

MATT: Here?

LIAM: No. What's right by the figure?

MATT: This is the one you just looked into that had this empty room that–

LIAM: Thank you, thank you. So, down the one hall.

MATT: Down the one hall. Look past here there is a stairway that descends downward.

LIAM: Down.

MATT: Looking down - pardon me. Looking down this hallway, you see what resembles - there's a door to your left that's closed currently, and it splits off into two directions, right and left.

LIAM: Right, I don't even tell anyone. I just start to slink down the steps.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Did he go down?

LIAM: Yes.

LAURA: Oh, geez Louise.

MATT: Okay. Put Clarota there. You continue down the stairway, and as you slowly move around, you can see down towards the bottom a very faint bit of reddish glow-stone light and a hallway that splits right and left.

LAURA: (whispering) We should go downstairs.

LIAM: Right and left? I go to the right.

MATT: Okay.

TRAVIS: Why don't we just go left?

LAURA: We're getting bored.

MATT: As you look past the right - you guys are all waiting in the room?

LIAM: You should just storm in.

LAURA: I get out.

LIAM: Start banging your weapons together.

LAURA: No! I come out, because you're taking too long.

MARISHA: (laughs)

MATT: Anyone else?

ORION: I saunter about.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: I'll head on out there.

SAM: I go where Pike goes.

MARISHA: We're just losing all attention span? Is that what's going on? We're just wandering off.

LAURA: No no no. I said we stay in the area, but I wanted to check on my brother because I feel like he's taking awhile.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: And he was just gonna check the doors.

MATT: As you move and glance over, you can see there are two duergar stationed on each side of the split hallways. One is a closed doorway to your right, and to the left there's an open doorway that leads into a room.

LIAM: And that's when I went to the right?

MATT: Well, as soon as you went into where the division was, you turned to the right and there were duergar there, and a duergar on the left.

LIAM: I'm going to turn my chin over to the left, and see what I see down there.

MATT: There's a second duergar that is currently sitting in armor, weapon to its side. Just occasionally glancing in. You can hear, every now and then, sounds like a moan or a slight whispering gurgle, and the duergar will lean in - “Hey, shut up in there! 'Kay?!”

LIAM: Yeah, I'm going to go kill this guy.

LAURA: You don't want to tell us what you found?

ORION: As I notice him going up, I'm going to -

(click) Vax, what are you doing?

LIAM: (softly) Uh, I'm killing someone. Hold, please.

(all laughing)

SAM: (humming a Muzak version of “The Girl from Ipanema”)

ORION: Uh, guys, Vax is going to go kill something.

MARISHA: It's okay. Let him do it by himself. It's what he does best.

LIAM: I'm going to sneak up on this duergar.

MATT: Make a stealth check.

ORION: I worry.

MARISHA: I know. It's okay.

LIAM: 19?

MATT: 19? Let me go ahead and–

LAURA: Oh, no! Look at this.

MATT: This'll be an interesting–

LIAM: Like a magician, you just whip it out, Matt.

MATT: That's what I'm doing. Trying, at least. There we go.

TRAVIS: Do you want an extra hand?

TALIESIN: If Mr. Wizard can do it, you can do it.

SAM: Watch out!

LAURA: It's that book.

MATT: Oh, it is the book, isn't it? Stupid book. As you've made your way here, Vex [sic] you look to the right. There's the duergar here to the left that's shouting into this room here.

SAM: Do something!

MATT: You missed entirely what I was telling you.

TRAVIS: Will you fucking do something, please?

LIAM: He's right there on the side. There's one over there, there's one over there. There's two. Oh, shit. Well, we all come slamming down in here.

SAM: Yeah!

TRAVIS: No, you're down there.

LIAM: So I sneak back up and I put a hand on my sister's shoulder, and I give her a little come along motion. And tell everyone else–

SAM: Don't you need some Grog?

LIAM: –I mouth “Kima” at everybody, and then pull my sister down.

MATT: As you're doing this, you hear footsteps across the way echoing through the hallway, what sounds like a number of other foot patters heading through the halls–

LAURA: (gasps) We should just go down.

MATT: –towards the front of the stronghold.

LIAM: I'm just pulling Vex down.

ORION: The front? Oh, the front of the front. Not where we're at, right?

MATT: Vex and Vax both disappear off to the side, down a hallway.

MARISHA: Before they leave I just tap their shoulders and meditate and grant them Guidance.

MATT: Okay, you can give one of them Guidance because it's concentration.

MARISHA: Uh, Vex.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: That's me.

MATT: Yes.

MARISHA: Fuck.

LAURA: Did you mean to give it to him?

MARISHA: Yes.

(everyone laughs)

ORION: Brava.

MATT: All right, who gets guidance?

SAM: The man one.

MATT: Vax.

MARISHA: Vax.

LIAM: So I pull my poison blade out and I pull the keen dagger out. Okay, and I take the keen dagger - so the one on the left is by the door and the one that muttered through the doorway, right?

MATT: The one right here.

LIAM: So I give a little fwip, toss in my hand and throw it right at his neck.

LAURA: At the same time I reach out and I go (arrow SFX).

LIAM: And the other one, the poison one, toward the other.

MATT: Okay and you are?

LAURA: And I was going to shoot at the other one.

MATT: Go ahead and roll for this guy here.

LIAM: That guy. That is a 17 for me.

MATT: 17 hits.

LAURA: 27.

MATT: 27, all right.

LIAM: And then on the other guy, or should I just go ahead and attack?

MATT: Go ahead and attack both.

LIAM: 17. So that's–

LAURA: And 25 on the same.

MATT: Both arrows on the guy on the right?

LAURA: Let's do both, one on each.

MATT: Each? (shooting SFX) You both - (impact SFX) - ?

LAURA: Yeah!

MATT: Okay, cool. Damage on the one on the left? Which is sneak attack because he didn't know you were there.

LIAM: So, 46 with the keen dagger on the guard at the door.

TALIESIN: Damn.

LAURA: So I was really useful!

MATT: The guy on the left, as he's leaning back, he's getting angry with whoever is in that room. As he turns back to take his post again, (swoosh SFX) (gurgling) he just gurgles, slumps to the ground. As he's slumping, an arrow goes (impact sound) into his stomach.

(everyone laughs)

LIAM: It's like a punctuation.

LAURA & MATT: Yeah.

MATT: Roll damage for the second attack.

LIAM: The poison dagger goes (thunk sound). Well, I didn't roll to hit him.

MATT: And you are using the poison effect on him?

LIAM: Yes.

LAURA: 15 on the other guy for me.

LIAM: That is a 19.

MATT: Okay, that hits. Now roll damage.

LIAM: This doesn't get sneak attack?

MATT: No.

LIAM: Because I already used that. I made some noise hitting the first guy. Seven plus the poison.

MATT: What is the poison damage?

LIAM: The poison is DC 15.

MATT: He does not make the save, even though he's a duergar.

LAURA: I go running back up since I've already shot my arrows.

MATT: Let me check one thing real fast.

LAURA: And I figured you've got this.

MATT: Check one thing.

ASHLEY: He could just clear this whole place by himself.

LIAM: Nine points of poison on him.

MATT: Okay. So, an arrow (impact SFX) into his chest just as the poison blade makes contact. You can see him (gurgling SFX) double over for a second, but the hardy duergar once-dwarven form seems to shrug off a lot of the poison's impact.

LAURA: Oh, shit!

MATT: He is still dribbling a very heavy amount of deep crimson from his mouth, but he still (gasps) looks over and sees you both in the hallway and goes to reach for his warhammer and turn around towards the door behind him.

LAURA: Can I throw an arrow at him?

LIAM: Do we roll for initiative at this point?

MATT: You guys roll for initiative to see who goes first.

SAM: I turn to Pike and say, “What the fuck is going on? Where are they?”

ORION: I don't know, but this book, Scanlan, is incredible.

SAM: I'm sure it is.

ORION: It's all about this, er, an ice thing–

SAM: I read non-fiction.

ORION: –and these other things.

ASHLEY: Let's head down there. I'm going to head down there.

LIAM: Careful, clanky.

ASHLEY: Oh.

MATT: So the rest of you are heading down there?

TRAVIS: I follow Pike down there.

SAM: I'm going, too.

LAURA: There are so many prisoners down this way.

MATT: Everyone else roll stealth checks.

LAURA: Everybody fucking come down.

MARISHA: Are we going down?

MATT: Stealth checks everyone. You guys both beat him on initiative.

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: Roll attacks, both of you, just roll the dice.

SAM: Roll the dice.

ORION: Roll the dice.

ASHLEY: 19.

LIAM: 28.

ASHLEY: Getting a handle on my armor.

MATT: Okay. You don't need to roll damage. He has like, two hit points left. You guys pepper him with additional arrows and daggers. The poor guys is like: “Uh, I'm gonna–” (impact SFX, gurgle) He just goes down with this horrible sense of overkill, his body just slumps up against the door, leaning against the wooden door he was guarding.

LAURA: I say on my earring: “I think we found the prison cells. Get down here.”

SAM: We're coming.

ORION: I'm assuming they're dead.

MATT: Both duergar.

LIAM: I start to loot the bodies.

MATT: Stealth checks?

ORION: 16.

MARISHA: 17.

TALIESIN: 12.

SAM: 12.

TRAVIS: 20.

ASHLEY: 19.

MATT: All right, go team!

MARISHA: Woo! We're stealthy bastards.

MATT: That was with disadvantage?

ASHLEY: I have to roll again?

LIAM: Yes.

LAURA: Why?

MATT: Because you're in heavy plate armor.

MARISHA & LAURA: No!

ALL: (words of encouragement)

ASHLEY: (laughs)

LAURA: That's not bad, that's still not bad.

ASHLEY: I rolled an eight.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Plus what?

ASHLEY: Plus nothing.

(all laugh)

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: (clanking SFX)

MATT: You guys, all rush down the stairs (stomping SFX) the clanking of the plate armor as you're going down. The rest of you wince as you notice it, but you make it down anyway.

ASHLEY: (laughing) Oh my God.

TRAVIS: I should have picked you up.

MARISHA: I'm actually going to go ahead and throw Guidance on Pike now.

SAM: Little late, little late.

TALIESIN: What does Guidance do?

MARISHA: It gives you a plus on your ability checks. And it gives you a 1d4 plus to your–

(several talking at once)

SAM: Do they already knew [sic] we were here? Now they really know.

MATT: So, the rest of you have made it down.

LIAM: Surprise!

MATT: In this hallway, there are two dead duergar on the ground. One with a closed door and one with an open door.

LAURA: Well, let's go look in the open door. Stealthily.

MATT: You glance over into the open door, you can see what appears to be a series of dungeon cells held underneath the stronghold.

LIAM: Lady Kima?

MATT: Within these, you can see there are a number of dwarven captives that are in very, very, very poor health–

TALIESIN: I don't care about them.

LAURA: We need to get them awake.

MATT: –that are currently lying down, unfed, gaunt.

SAM: Are any of them Lady Kima? Because if they're not, they're about to die.

LAURA: No, they're regular dwarves, they're good people.

ORION: I go inspect them and see what's going on.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: I'll go in with Tiberius.

MATT: Okay, you guys enter. As you look around, there are a series of largely decomposed bodies in a few of these cells. They are people who've just been left to die.

LAURA: Oh no.

MATT: One, there are these kind of strange deep underground, rat-like creatures that are feeding on one of them. One of the dwarves is just wheezing in pain (moaning). You can see his stomach is a little distended. The other one is either unconscious, asleep, or dead. You can't tell.

ASHLEY: Can I do a Mass Cure on them?

MATT: You can if you'd like.

ASHLEY: Okay. I'll do that.

LIAM: Yes, I was about to say. I'm going to go start inspecting the other door.

TALIESIN: I'll go with him.

LAURA: Why don't you unlock the prison cells here?

MARISHA: Yeah, can you unlock the prison cells?

LIAM: Oh, sorry.

LAURA: Can we go in? Can we talk to them?

MATT: If you guys want to. So you go through. It's fairly simple over time for you to unlock the cells if you'd like, the two that are in there. There's a difference between healing magic and nutrition. You make them feel physically better for the moment, but their physical form itself is failing.

TRAVIS: Just a thought, shouldn't we clear this mess before we let prisoners out?

MATT: They need food, they need air, they need to be out of here soon. They're both on the edge of death.

SAM: Put them in the bag of holding, Grog.

MARISHA: I pull out a water.

ORION: I go to the room, I take out my bottle of water..

MARISHA: I'll do the opposite one.

MATT: You guys hear heavy footsteps coming from the stairway you guys just descended from.

TRAVIS: I go stand right next to the stairway.

MARISHA & TALIESIN: In the cells, in the cells.

LIAM: I pull my sister and we flank. I push her into flanking position to the door.

LAURA: Oh God, I nock an arrow, notch an arrow?

ORION: Where are they coming from?

LIAM: The stairs, from where we entered?

MATT: What are you guys doing?

MARISHA: I jump in the cells and I pull a dead, decomposing corpse over the top of me.

LAURA: Eww, Keyleth. All kinds of nastiness.

TALIESIN: I find a corner of a cell and slowly pull out my gun.

MARISHA: I'm going savage!

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: I should make sure all the doors are shut, not locked.

MATT: All right, all the doors are shut. Pike, anything you doing?

ASHLEY: I'm just, you know, preparing.

MATT: (laughs) All right.

MARISHA: Just kicking it, just chilling.

LAURA: Do we need to move out of the way of the stairs?

LIAM: Vax is scooching Scanlan out of the way to take that position right there.

TALIESIN: The bear is at the back cell.

LAURA: Scanlan, where are you?

SAM: There's voices coming from the stairs?

LIAM: Yeah, someone's coming.

SAM: But there's a bear in the stairs.

LAURA: Well, Trinket's coming down.

MARISHA: I call, “Trinket, Trinket, Trinket (kissing SFX) Trinket!”

MATT: Trinket barely hears you from way over at the side.

MARISHA: (kissing SFX) Come on.

MATT: He's coming into this room. Clarota just steps back, along the side of the stairs and out of view. A few moments pass as the footsteps slowly trail off.

ORION: I leave and turn around where Vex and Vax are.

MARISHA: I know.

LAURA: What's in the other door?

MATT: The other door is currently locked from what you can tell.

LIAM: One moment. It is now not locked, I think.

MATT: (chuckles)

LIAM: 25?

MATT: (clicking SFX) You push the door open and you see immediately, the fast moving heft of some large blade towards your head.

SAM: Oh, snap!

LAURA: Oh, it's Kima.

LIAM: No, it's a trap ready to hit me.

MATT: That is 24 versus armor class.

LIAM: That hits.

MATT: That hits, all right.

LAURA: Oh, you didn't check for traps.

LIAM: Didn't check for traps.

TRAVIS: I thought you were good at this shit.

LIAM: I'm going to use uncanny dodge.

MATT: What would have been 20 points of slashing damage is reduced to 10. So you take 10 damage as the axe (impact SFX) hits you and imbeds itself in the wooden door, pulls back. Now you see as a duergar wearing this nasty-looking black leather tunic with a hood pulled back, with a giant, gnarled, hefted greataxe, words escaped me on that one, has a bunch of scars on its face. As it's grinning, it pulls the axe out of the doorway.

LIAM: Right, I spit on the ground, and yank my belt off and throw it at his head.

LAURA: And I yell 'hold.'

MATT: Okay. As you throw the belt–

SAM: Hold?

LAURA: Yeah, tell him to stop attacking.

LIAM: Yeah, serpent.

MATT: –he ducks out of the way, pulls back out of the way, as the snake forms itself. It goes ahead and makes its attack. Go ahead and roll for snake attack against him.

SAM: Snake attack!

LIAM: Okay, 12 plus, I don't know what, 12. Is my attack, his attack, snake attack?

MATT: Did you roll a 12 on that?

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: Okay, that will not hit unfortunately.

LIAM: All right.

MATT: As he slaps it off himself and it (swish SFX) cascades off to the side of the room.

ASHLEY: Is he in a cell?

TRAVIS: Is a base attack a straight line from him to Vax to–

SAM: He's protecting the cells.

ASHLEY: He's protecting the cells.

MATT: At which point he kicks the door closed again.

TRAVIS: Can I, in my rage, bullrush through this?

SAM: Yes, yes.

MATT: Now roll initiative, guys.

ORION: As he's going I immediately cast Stone Skin on myself. (cracking SFX)

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: What I like is that there are eight of us and one of him.

LAURA: Possibly, if no one else is behind that door.

TALIESIN: So far.

LAURA: He's in a room by himself.

LIAM: I can see the square, it's very small.

MATT: You've looked inside, seeing a brief bit of the room. 25 to 20?

TALIESIN: 26.

LIAM: 20.

MATT: 26, all right Percy.

LIAM: (shooting SFX)

MATT: All right. 20 to 15?

MARISHA: 18.

LAURA: 15.

ORION: 19.

MATT: 15 to 10?

TRAVIS: 14.

MATT: 14. 10 to five?

ASHLEY: Seven.

MATT: Five to one?

SAM: (nervously) Four.

MATT: All right. Percy, you're up first.

TALIESIN: Where am I?

MATT: You are way back in this cell, and you hear a slam of broken wood and another slam of a door closing.

TALIESIN: I'm going to run to the hall.

MATT: Make an acrobatics check to try and move through this cluster of people here.

TALIESIN: I can do that. 24.

MATT: 24. You leap over, vaulting off of Trinket, land and move into this hallway. And that's the extent of your movement.

TALIESIN: Okay, I'm going to try and take a shot and blow the lock.

MATT: Okay, with the Bad News or with your–?

TALIESIN: Oh no, Bad News is away. This is just with the handheld, shooting at the lock at the door.

MATT: Okay, go for it.

TALIESIN: Jesus H, 30.

MATT: Go ahead and roll damage.

TALIESIN: Nine points of damage.

MATT: Nine points of damage. As the door slams back and you prepare yourself to try and kick it open, you hear the familiar (zoom SFX) of one of Percy's pepperbox bullets as the actual handle of the door (impact SFX) gets blown off and there's a small hole in the wooden door now where its handle once was. The door swings open a little bit loosely due to the impact. That ends your turn.

TALIESIN: That ends my turn.

MATT: Vax, you're up.

LIAM: Okay. All I'm gonna do is grab the hole of the door and yank it open and yell, “Your turn, Grog!”

MARISHA: Oh! That's fun!

MATT: As you pull it open, the dwarf backs up over what you can see now, this room is completely covered in a series of really nasty, hooked instruments. Hot irons, you can see large pincers–

TRAVIS: (laughs excitedly)

MATT: –you can see various blades.

ASHLEY: Oh, it's like a torture chamber?

MATT: It's a torture chamber.

(all groan)

TRAVIS: It's Christmas!

TALIESIN: Grog is running into Toys R Us. This is going to be great.

MATT: You see gently as he backs away there is someone on this rack-like table. The dwarf backs up with his axe getting ready.

LIAM: I use my bonus action to say, “You are so fucked, dwarf.”

(all laugh)

MATT: All right, that brings us to Tiberius.

ORION: I like where this is going, Vax. Wait, I go over there first and then I say that.

(all laugh)

MATT: Acrobatics check.

ORION: Acrobatics, why?

SAM: You gotta jump over people.

MATT: You've got to move through people. The area is congested. Small spaces, man. Downside of a big party.

ORION: Okay. 22.

MATT: 22. You manage to move through, push the bear out of the way. Move, Trinket. Get out the way!

ORION: (muttering) Bear!

MATT: You manage to make your way, squeeze past Percy.

ORION: The bear surprisingly smells really nice.

MATT: All right, Tiberius, what do you want to do now?

ORION: I'm going to follow suit as I see what Vax is doing. I'm going to cast Hold Person on the dwarf.

MATT: You don't have visual on the dwarf currently, the dwarf is back–

ORION: What? That's absurd!

MATT: As you run through the hallway - which you don't know there's a dwarf there - you rush out to the hallway after hearing all this commotion. You look in and there's an open door into a room that's currently vacant. You don't have enough movement to get close enough, unfortunately.

ORION: Oh well, poop. I… I encourage violence.

(all laugh)

MATT: A wondrous use of an action.

ORION: Do it! Do it, Grog! Destroy them! With no regard to any of his existence.

MATT: Keyleth.

TRAVIS: (laughing) I encourage violence!

LIAM: That's the best line of the night! (laughs)

MATT: You are currently in a cell with a dead body draped over you.

(all laughing)

MARISHA: It's cozy down here. Okay, so with the dead body, I hear what's going on - we're roleplaying it up!

ORION: Get the body off of you.

MARISHA: I morph into Minxy form.

TRAVIS: Minxy!

MARISHA: And as I morph into Minxy form, I take the dead body that's on top of me and just pick it up with my mouth.

MATT: In your mouth, the body stirs. It wasn't quite dead.

MARISHA: Oh, why?!

LAURA: (Gasps) Oh, Keyleth!

MARISHA: It was supposed to be - I wanted the dead one.

TRAVIS: Minxy says I'm sorry!

MARISHA: Can I drop that one and find a dead one?

MATT: Well, you wanted a dead one. It is now.

ALL: Oh!

MARISHA: That's fine, that's fine.

LIAM: Oh, murdering children again.

TALIESIN: Spend the entire game being the worst person in the world.

MARISHA: I know! I try so hard, you guys!

TRAVIS: Was it a child duergar?

MARISHA: I try so hard, I'm still the fucking worst!

MATT: So, you now have a dead, gaunt dwarf, hanging from Minxy's mouth.

(all laugh)

MATT: What do you want to do?

SAM: Keep chewing.

MARISHA: Um, it was…

TRAVIS: Oh, go ahead, do something else.

TALIESIN: At least it's not gamey, it's fresh.

MARISHA: Keyleth tries. Keyleth tries so hard.

ORION: You're not trying hard enough, damn it!

MARISHA: Fuck you man, all right? I'm having a tough day.

TRAVIS: You hear a little dwarf in the corner go: “Mommy?”

MARISHA: Vex brought up the fact that I killed a kid. I'm having all these memories coming back, I'm on the brink.

MATT: Yeah, there's some PTSD coming through.

MARISHA: So I've got this now-dead corpse in my mouth and I come out around the corner.

MATT: Make an Acrobatics check. Because you're still moving through this clustered hallway with a dead dwarf in your mouth.

LIAM: Holy cow!

MARISHA: I'm a tiger so–

LIAM: That was Greyspine's cousin.

MARISHA: Can I have an advantage? Oh, I rolled a 15. Plus being a tiger?

MATT: You're fine. You manage to push through, you're leaping through.

MARISHA: I'm pouncy. And I come out into the hallway.

MATT: You actually shift Tiberius out of the way. This is a very small space, you're a very big cat. You're really pushing for space here.

MARISHA: Move!

MATT: It's very, very tight quarters for you, you're like -

(struggling SFX)

ORION: Keyleth, as a cat, you smell less good as Trinket does.

MARISHA: It's not me, it's the dead body.

ORION: Oh. That's disgusting.

MARISHA: And I look at the dwarf.

MATT: You can't see him from your vantage point, he's actually back out of sight.

ORION: I can't see him, you can't see him.

MARISHA: No? Can I shift to see him at all?

MATT: You don't know there's a dwarf there. You just know there's some sort of commotion going on. You move around the corner and you see just an empty room.

LIAM: Everybody give up your turn to Grog.

LAURA: I know, let him go in the room.

ORION: Just let Grog deal with this butthole.

MARISHA: I look at Grog and I foam at the mouth a little bit with the corpse and I–

SAM: Encourage violence.

MARISHA: –I encourage violence.

(all laugh)

MATT: All right. Vex?

MARISHA: Just gnawing on the dead dwarf.

LAURA: Oh, well, let's make this nice and easy. I smack Grog on the ass and say, “Go get him”.

TRAVIS: (eager snarling)

MATT: All right, Grog, it's your turn.

TRAVIS: (eager snarling continues)

MARISHA: Does he get advantage because we're all encouraging violence?

ORION: Yeah, or inspiration?

MATT: Oh no, you get inspiration dice for this whole set up. 1d8 inspiration dice.

SAM: You don't kill him in one shot, it's very very disappointing.

MATT: All right, you run in.

TRAVIS: You said the room was full of shiny pointy things on the wall, right?

MATT: Yes.

TRAVIS: I would like to bull rush the dwarf up and against the wall, try and spear him with all the sharp shit on the wall.

MATT: Okay!

ALL: (cheering)

MATT: Oh, that's nasty. Okay then, so for the– (laughs)

LIAM: Instant karma's going to get you, man.

MATT: All right, so go ahead and make an athletics check.

LIAM: You hear that, Keyleth?

MARISHA: (growling)

TRAVIS: 24.

MATT: Yeah, against his seven. You rush in and with your first attack, you grab him, lift him, and you can see there's a series of giant meat hooks hanging from the back of the wall, and you just lift him up and (impaling SFX) shove him down onto the hook which protrudes from the front of his chest. (gurgling SFX)

TRAVIS: No, perfect. Tell me I get another attack.

MATT: You do.

TRAVIS: Excellent!

MATT: That's 12 points of damage and he's currently restrained by the hook through his chest.

LAURA: Impaled? Oh!

TRAVIS: Perfect! With my second attack as he's screaming out I reach inside, grab his lower jaw and pull him straight down.

MATT: Okay, make an attack roll.

LAURA: Oh no! That's so gross.

ASHLEY: Oh, I love this so much.

LIAM: Vax is using his free hand to cover his eyes.

SAM: Keyleth starts eating him.

TRAVIS: (laughing) 24.

MATT: (laughs) Go ahead and roll damage on this.

LAURA: Oh, sick.

TRAVIS: With a 12?

MATT: For flavor, roll a 12. Why not? You're pulling his jaw.

TRAVIS: Excellent! (laughing)

ASHLEY: He rolled really high.

TRAVIS: 15.

MATT: After you throw him onto the hook, his axe clatters to the ground and he reaches up with his hands to grab you and it looks like he's pulling back to try and bring you in for a headbutt. This angry look of burning rage in his white eyes, this fucked-up duergar with all these scars on his face, as he reaches up towards you, you take your giant hand and jam it into his maw. With this horrible (choking SFX) sound, as you put all your muscle into it, glaring him in the face with a terrible grin you (breaking SFX) and yank the jaw off from the bottom of his head.

ALL: (cheering)

MATT: A spatter of blood across the front of his mouth and his tongue dangling, he gives out this horrible (gagging scream) this gurgling scream as all the blood begins to pour up into his throat. With that, clutching the jaw with one hand, you begin to pummel him in the face over and over, with his jaw, as he's watching, his head slowly cave in.

TRAVIS: (laughing) Yes!

SAM: I think he's going to make it.

MATT: Until eventually, he's no longer moving and you throw the jaw to the ground, just coated with blood.

LIAM: You're going to pull through, buddy.

LAURA: Pike! I think Grog, um, I think he did his job.

ASHLEY: I scream out, “Good job Grog! That's your best one yet!”

MARISHA: And they say video games are violent.

(all laugh)

LAURA: (gagging sounds)

MATT: As you've entered the room now–

ASHLEY: Wait, is he dead?

(all laugh)

MATT: Oh, he's very dead.

TRAVIS: We made cheese of him.

MATT: He lies there limply on the wall, twitching every few seconds. Grog, still in a rage, you look over at the other individual. You can see now strapped to this wooden frame is a smallish humanoid, female, currently chained and being pulled on a rack. You can see bunch of scars and wounds, blood pouring from each one of them.

SAM: Is that our girl?

LAURA: That's our girl!

TALIESIN: I'm running in. Do I know how to disable the rack?

MATT: You can probably figure it out with a tinker.

LIAM: Pike!

TRAVIS: Is it chains or rope?

LAURA: Come heal her!

LIAM: We need Pike in here!

TRAVIS: Is it chains or rope?

SAM: I'll go!

MATT: It's chains holding her on.

TALIESIN: I'm going to undo it.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: Wait. Do we know it's her?

MATT: Go ahead and make a tinker check.

LAURA: It's her. It's gotta be her.

ORION: Whoever it is, we should help.

TALIESIN: What do I add? Is it proficiency bonus?

MATT: Proficiency bonus.

TALIESIN: 12.

MATT: 12? You take a moment and you manage to find where the winch to this machine is, where you can go ahead and release the tension and eventually the chains go a little more slack and (gasps) the halfling woman takes a deep breath and looks about the room a second, looks like there's a bit of a haze, but through the haze there's this constant anger and she looks down and goes: “So? Are you gonna let me go? Come on! Release these chains!”

ASHLEY: Who is she?

TRAVIS: Wait, wait. Find out who she is first.

LAURA: Can we insight and make sure that it's really who she–

MATT: You can indeed. This is an insight check.

LAURA: Great, I don't get any… Anybody else want to roll for insight?

LIAM: Five, one. Pike, roll well. The twins fucked it.

ASHLEY: Insight?

LIAM: Scanlan! Come up here!

SAM: Yeah, yeah, oh.

ASHLEY: 15! 15?

LIAM: She's not in her right mind.

MATT: It's a very small room, only a few people can make it in here.

SAM: I'm gonna take a peek at her. What do I do? What do I roll?

LIAM: Insight to see if she's in her right mind.

ASHLEY: 15? 18 is better.

MATT: At this point, it's pretty apparent that whatever this woman is, she's been here a while and has been subjected to many, many horrible things and still has that spark of life to her, mainly out of vengeance, anger, and pain, but she does not seem to be overtly aggressive or trying to deceive you; just trying to get out of these fucking chains.

LAURA: Well, let's let her go.

ORION: I'll do an Arcana check on her.

MATT: What's that? Arcana check? To…?

ORION: See if there's like any kind of magical impurities in her.

TRAVIS: If she's under the Imperius Curse.

MATT: Best you can tell, there's none.

LIAM: I'm pulling out my lockpicks and I'm going to start working on–

SAM: I'm going to heal her with a little bit of a song.

LIAM: And you know my lockpick snaps so… just totally broken.

ASHLEY: How hurt is she?

SAM: If I may.

MATT: She's pretty rough. As you look up, she's not clothed. Her body is just a spray of scars and gashes and rake marks. She's been tortured to an extent you hadn't seen in person, and to still be tensing her muscles against the chains and looking at you with this intensity, if this is indeed Lady Kima, you now see why she's made the reputation she has.

LIAM: Grog, the locking mechanism on this is jammed.

SAM: Okay. So, I step forward and I pull out my flute and I sing, (singing) “As long as I got my song and flute, I'm gonna give some healing to you. Love and magic in the air tonight, gonna give you some hit points. Gonna give you some hit points, gonna give you some hit points of our love.”

(all laugh)

SAM: Dadadanana, okay. I roll nine hit points.

MATT: The fresher wounds seal up, the blood flow comes to a stop. You see her muscles tense for a moment - her tension in her muscles relax for a minute. She looks to you for a second and says, “It's been a while since I've heard a song. Thank you.”

SAM: It was a slow jam.

TALIESIN: Please be careful for a moment. Can someone cover her ears for just a second?

TRAVIS: Yeah, I got it.

ASHLEY: Earmuffs.

TALIESIN: I'm going to utility shot - I'm going to put my gun against the lock, somewhere where it will not harm her and just blow it.

MATT: Go ahead and roll damage. You don't have to roll to hit, it's right there.

TALIESIN: 15. Is it two locks?

MATT: Well, there's one chain for the legs, one chain for the arms.

TALIESIN: Okay. 15 for the leg. 10 for the arm.

MATT: (gunshot sound) The legs get free. (gunshot sound) The chain mostly snaps on the top part, but not quite enough. It's enough for you, Grog, to-

TRAVIS: I got it! (snarling)

MATT: You reach over and bring it down, with a brief moment of extreme tension as the whole room watches Grog walk up with his axe and swing it down towards this halfling. Before you have a moment to stop, everyone's heart skips a beat. The chain is bisected–

LIAM: Ease down! Ease down.

MATT: –at which point the halfling woman immediately jumps to her feet with almost like a kip-up stand and is now standing on top of the table. Her arms are still bound and she - (groans) You can now see where the metal was weakened from the axe blow. She (metal snapping SFX) pulls herself free from the metal binding–

TRAVIS: That's hot.

MATT: –there's a blister across her wrist, from how long she's been pulling against these restraints. But she bore through it, with a little bit of blood that trickles from that wound. She has freed herself and she looks around the rest of the group. “So, I take it you're not from around here?”

ORION: No! Would you like some water?

MATT: She grabs it from you, pulls off the cork and just starts chugging like she hasn't had anything to drink in a long time.

LAURA: Lady Kima, we need to get you out of here.

LIAM: Allura has sent us.

MATT: She caps it off after a moment and takes a deep breath. “I'd hoped she would. It was foolish of me to come down here so unprepared. Just knew there wasn't much time.” (chuckles)

LIAM: Time 'til what?

MATT: She looks around and says, “Look, we don't- it's a story. I have no–” And she kind of points to her pretty much unclothed, unarmored form, and says, “I need to find my implements. We need to get out of here.”

TRAVIS: Could I offer to you this black, studded leather, dwarven armor? It's not leather, actually.

LIAM: It's magical, it'll fit you.

ORION: Would you care for this robe?

LAURA: Which sounds better?

MATT: What armor were you offering her?

TRAVIS: It's the black, dwarven armor–

LIAM: The armor that I found and gave to Grog. It's magical.

MATT: Oh, the studded leather.

LIAM: Yes.

TRAVIS: It's in the bag.

MATT: She goes, “Sure, it works for now.” She takes it from you and starts putting it on. You see her wincing as she puts it on, as it covers some of the wounds. Her whole body is just sore, but she still pushes through it.

ASHLEY: I'm going to heal her a little bit more.

MATT: Okay.

ASHLEY: I'll put my hands on her. I'm sorry. You're not fully healed, let me help you out.

TRAVIS: (quietly) Grog likes scars.

MATT: As you do, she takes a moment and she says - You heal her and she goes, “Can I-” She sees your mace and goes, “Can I borrow that for a second?”

ASHLEY: Uh…

MATT: “Please?”

ASHLEY: My mace?

MATT: “Your mace, please.”

ASHLEY: What do you need it for?

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: You can have mine.

MATT: “Do you trust me?”

ASHLEY: I don't know. This is all I have to protect myself.

MATT: “You've come this far.”

ORION: Grog has something for you.

SAM: Say yes to life, Pike.

ASHLEY: All right, well, I also have a morningstar, but this is–

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Are you gonna give it back?

MATT: As you hand it out, she grabs it from your hands–

ASHLEY: That was rude.

MATT: –walks to the edge of the table–

ASHLEY: I don't like her.

MATT: –stares at the dwarf that is currently hooked onto the wall. (angry yell) And with a yell, slams it right into his face, causing his head to explode against the back of the wall. Slams it again and again and again, and is just making hamburger of his entire body. The arm sloughs off and she's just going nuts. You can see her bludgeoning over and over again with a spray of gore on her. And there's this look of anger, frustration–

LAURA: She's raging.

MATT: –and a sick sense of joy a little bit in her eyes in how she's just tearing this dwarf apart. Eventually, after this frenzy, you're all taken aback, and she takes a moment. (heavy breathing) There is very little left recognizable of what once was a duergar.

SAM: I notice a bulge in Grog's pants.

(all laugh)

ORION: I use my Mage Hand to slowly pick up my bottle of water…

(all laugh)

MATT: Okay. She takes the mace she borrowed from you. (splatter sound)

ASHLEY: I'm sorry I questioned you.

MATT: As she begins to hand it back to you, there's a slight flash of radiant energy that emanates from her hand, and it burns all of the blood that currently encapsulates the mace off, and hands it back to you. “Thank you. I needed that.”

ASHLEY: You're very welcome. I'm sorry I questioned you.

ORION: Give her something, Grog! Let her use one of your things!

TRAVIS: That was amazing.

(all laugh)

ORION: Like, you know, give her one of your things, Grog.

TRAVIS: Could I, um, would you like to touch my axe?

(all laugh)

MATT: “If you want to part with it, certainly.“

TRAVIS: Oh, uh. (clears throat, sniffs) Maybe we should get out of here.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Why don't we collect your things?

LAURA: Yeah, where are they? Do you know?

TALIESIN: I would assume they're being stored upstairs.

MATT: “I have no idea. They're either in the vault or they're in the armory.”

SAM: Vault or the armory? Those are places that we can go?

LAURA: There's a vault?

TALIESIN: Are there stairs in the room that we're in?

MATT: “As far as I can tell, my–”

LIAM: Lady Kima, are these things absolutely necessary? We have a secret entrance to this place. We could leave now. Are they of vital importance, the things you've lost?

MATT: She thinks to herself for a second, and goes, “They are divine implements, gifted to me from an avatar of Bahamut directly. I feel, to leave them behind would be a partial failure to my quest. Not to mention, that what we may face beyond this, we'll need every bit of help we can get.”

TRAVIS: Oh, shit.

LIAM: Well, that's that then.

ORION: You'll have a friend in us, that's for sure.

LAURA: Let's find the frigging vault!

TALIESIN: Let's go upstairs.

LIAM: Let's go to the vault! Let's go upstairs.

MATT: As you show the back of that card, she gives you a look and smiles and says, “Ah. It's good to see that your scale of color does not belie your intent. That is a face I've not seen for some time. I thank you.” She leaps off the table. “So.” (sighs) “Shall we?”

SAM: Do you know where the vault is?

MATT: “I can show you.”

LAURA: (whispering) Yes!

SAM: Lead the way!

MARISHA: I go up to her, still in my Minxy form, and I rub on her legs.

TALIESIN: Have you dropped the body yet?

TRAVIS: I get right up behind them too, competing for space.

TALIESIN: Are you dragging a dead body around?

MARISHA: No, I dropped the body. While she was talking, I took the body, and I drug it back, and I buried my shame.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: So, first, I buried my shame.

MATT: Your shame has been sufficiently buried.

(laughter continues)

ORION: Hashtag bury your shame.

MARISHA: And I purr.

MATT: She doesn't look at you, but she pats you absentmindedly as she passes you, her direct intent on heading back up those stairs herself.

LAURA: All right.

SAM: Let's go, but should we unlock all the other dwarves?

LAURA: Yes, let's let all the other dwarves out, and maybe give them some food to try to help them out, if we can.

TRAVIS: In the meantime, I have a greatsword or a morningstar mace that you can have until we find your items.

MATT: “Greatsword.”

TRAVIS: Greatsword it is.

MATT: She takes it from you, and the sword is a little over a foot taller than she is. Maybe a little more than that.

LAURA: She's really fricking buff.

MATT: But as you hand it to her, she still takes it, and you can see–

LIAM: She's a ripped halfling.

LAURA: That's pretty badass.

MATT: –she is a built halfling female. She has seen some war, and she has survived some shit.

LIAM: She's the Tyler Durden of halflings.

(all laugh)

MATT: Kind of, yeah.

TRAVIS: As I see her grab the sword, I ask, “Would you care for some ale?”

(all laugh)

MATT: She glances over her shoulder at you, and says, “Later. We have nothing to celebrate for yet.”

TRAVIS: Absolutely. Plenty of time!

(all laugh)

LIAM: I think Grog is smitten!

LAURA: She comes to your knee.

LIAM: Oh my goodness!

LAURA: Can I run in the little prison, and tell the dwarves, if they are conscious, to say, “Don't exit from where you came. There's a secret entrance up and in a store room. Go that way, and stealth out.”

MATT: One of the ones that was semi-conscious–

LAURA: All of that, I say all of it.

MATT: He sits up and looks at– (laughs) That's fucked up. Sits up and looks back at you and - (ragged breathing) “Thank ye. Thank ye kindly.”

LAURA: Here's some cheese!

(all laugh)

MATT: He takes it hungrily through the bars and just starts eating it, incessantly, as you leave.

TALIESIN: Government cheese.

LIAM: Is provolone all you've got?

MATT: Lady Kima's already up the stairs.

LAURA: It's Velveeta.

MATT: (disgusted groan) Velveeta!

SAM: We're following up the stairs.

MARISHA: (laughs) It's calories!

MATT: All right. Clean this off here.

LAURA: Oh goodness, oh goodness!

TALIESIN: It's going to be fun! Savage burning–

TRAVIS: I'm right with Minxy, competing for first place.

LIAM: I place a hand on Lady Kima's shoulder–

MARISHA: First place, for how fucked-up we are.

TRAVIS: Perfection! (laughs)

MARISHA: Perfection! (laughs)

LIAM: –place a hand on Kima's shoulder and say, “Please, allow me,” and move several feet ahead of her and start sneaking along.

MATT: As you move up to her, you notice she's standing at the bottom of the stairs with a tension, staring up at the top of the stairway, where Clarota is looking down at her–

LAURA: (gasps)

MATT: –and backing away, and she goes–

ORION: Oh! Yes. Uh–

LAURA: Wait- Wait!

MATT: “Who is this filthy–”

TALIESIN: No no no no!

MARISHA: (screams)

ORION: I put my Mage Hand in front of her. Wait, wa-wait! Hold on! It- it's fine! Er, this mind flayer is with us! We saved him, or he- he's our ally now; he's fine. No one needs to fight. He, uh, she's fine, he's fine. His name is Clarota.

TALIESIN: He's been an enormous help.

MATT: Without taking her eyes off of Clarota–

ORION: This is Kiva-

SAM: Kima.

ORION: Kima.

MATT: She looks back over - (laughs)

ORION: We are allies, all, yes?

MATT: “Are you to tell me that you've come down here and allied yourself with an entity that is the anathema of the Mountain?”

ORION: Yes!

TRAVIS: Uh, what was that word?

LIAM: I'm right at her shoulder, so I say, “We understand he's dangerous, but he's gotten us this far.”

MATT: “And for what purpose? You think they don't have plots lined out for weeks and months–”

ORION: No, no, no! Listen, listen-

MATT: “–there is no trust to be had with these creatures.”

LIAM: He has been shit out by these creatures. They do not want him or trust him. He is an outcast. And we are working together, in this moment, and without him we would not have gotten here.

LAURA: We see a single tear drop from Clarota's eye.

MATT: “And with him you will never get out.”

ORION: No! We have his, er, alliance. There's a greater entity controlling his people, which he has been outcast from, like Vax was saying!

MATT: “And have you not thought for a second that perhaps all of you are being manipulated by this creature?”

ASHLEY: Well, I have.

MATT: You can see the greatsword now flares with divine energy and she goes, “I will not stand here and let us ally ourselves with this filth!”

ORION: (shouting) “Lady Kima!” And I blow fire breath. And I use Control Flames to create a bunch of swords around me with fire.

LAURA: Don't threaten Kima! She's better.

ORION: (harshly) I give you my word.

MATT: Her attention divided from Clarota, now tends towards you.

ORION: Don't act me a fool, and don't treat me like one either! None of us are half-wits as you are claiming. We would not be fooled by such a creature like this. The words he speaks are true. And we believe him.

MATT: You go ahead and make a diplomacy check. Or a persuasion. Persuasion check.

LAURA: Oh god!

LIAM: Get it on, Tiberius!

TRAVIS: Do it.

LIAM: Get. It. On.

ORION: That's terrible.

LIAM: Oh. Get it off?

SAM: Not good.

LAURA: Not good?

SAM: Not good!

ORION: 12.

MATT: 12. Okay. She walks towards you, and with each step, you can see the color of her eyes begins to vanish, giving way to an extremely bright, burning, silver light. And she says–

LAURA: (whispering) Oh my god, she's so cool!

MATT: “Listen. You come with me. Without this creature! Or you continue with it, and without me.”

ORION: Why you have to be like that?

MATT: “I will not walk beside this. I have had its people devour mine since I set foot in here. This creature, whatever its reasoning is, is not in your best interest. It will lead you into a web of your own destruction! I've seen their kind work.“

LIAM: Clarota!

ORION: Yeah, they're mostly buttholes, but he's not a butthole!

(all laugh)

ORION: I understand that -

LIAM: Clarota!

ORION: - we had to kill a couple and he actually helped a lot!

LIAM: Speak your mind! Convince her. Fix this.

MATT: Clarota, at the top of the stairs, you can see his tendrils in his mouth curl back in a sneer, his hands crossed before–

ORION: He won't even do anything!

MATT: –Clarota says, (gasping, breathy voice) "Listen. I am not going to walk where I am not welcome. I will not wake up with this–”

LIAM: Giving us a Walking Dead decision.

MATT: “–woman's blade in my back! We made a deal.”

MARISHA: People with kids. You deal with this all the time.

LIAM: I walk between them and put hands out.

LAURA: Come on, roll a 20!

LIAM: And say, “We all want the same thing. Kima. Tell us. What is it that you've come here for? What is your purpose here? Speak your mind, if you are true.”

MATT: Kima turns back towards you, the same glowing flare in her eyes. “I've come here to rid this mountain and this continent of the darkness that resides deep within the bowels of this thing's city!”

LIAM: Clarota, why have you come here. What is it you seek?

MATT: Clarota settles into itself for a second. “Ah, I've come to destroy this creature K'Varn and free my people.”

LIAM: Then the two of you. Get over your fucking shit.

(all laugh)

LIAM: We want the same thing here. Get over yourselves. Both of you. We share a common purpose. We are going to end this fucking bullshit. Kima, we have come here for you. Pay us the respect that we have earned. We have come a long way for you. He is an unlikely ally, but he has gotten us to this point. And together, for this moment and this moment only, we can work together. We don't have to be school chums or buddies in a week from now. But right now, right here, we will work together and achieve the same thing. What say you, Kima?

MATT: She looks towards you and says, “Free his people, he says. What do you think will happen once his people are free? Shall they let us walk out on our own?”

ORION: Yes! He said so! And then they'll be buttholes when we leave!

MATT: “You know so very little of these dark caverns, my dragon friend.”

ORION: Yeah, it's our first time here!

MATT: “These entities I watched steal the very life essence of the men and women I hired and travelled with for weeks down here. I watched them capture them, and devour their very minds before me, and laugh and cackle as I fled into the shadows.”

LAURA: But they were under control of K'Varn at that point. Yeah!

MATT: “Oh! Understand; whether or not K'Varn controls them to give them direction, they are of that type of mindset at all points. They do not hope society will thrive. They do not want us free peoples to walk the surface. They want us for food.“

SAM: Lady Kima, if I may. If you're intending us to choose between you, and our ally Clarota, and we can't get you to see eye to eye with us, then I'm afraid you leave us no choice but to choose our own friend Clarota over you.

LAURA: (gasps) What?

SAM: We're giving you one last chance. Either you are with us, or you are against us. This is a threat.

MATT: “So you walk in here, save me from my binds, under the words of my dear, lifelong friend Arcanist Allura–”

SAM: We mean you no ill will. It is you who are aggravating the situation.

LIAM: You could be sitting in a cell by yourself doing fuck-all, or ending this problem now.

MATT: Make a persuasion check.

MARISHA: Everyone's giving her inspirational talks.

LAURA: I'm so nervous! Oh, Scanlan, come on!

SAM: Well, I rolled a three…

LIAM: I rolled a 13.

SAM: But I have a plus 13! So that's a 16.

LIAM: Plus 13? Three plus 13? Okay.

ASHLEY: Plus, plus, uh… hold on.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Because, you didn't- where the fuck.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: War God's Blessing!

MATT: Cleric flail!

ASHLEY: No, I can't do that, because that's when a person makes an attack roll.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Get 'em, Scanlan!

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Can I assist?

LAURA: He assisted because he was talking–

MATT: Unfortunately, it's too late. Once the roll–

SAM: No, he was with me, he was with me.

LAURA: He assisted?

MATT: Right, right. And because of that, the DC has been considered. She takes a moment and steps forward. She's a few inches taller than you.

SAM: Of course she is! Everyone is!

(all laugh)

MATT: And she looks at you, and says, “He of the pretty voice. I am grateful that all of you have come and traversed all this danger in my name, to free me from the binds that have held me. And I do wish, very much, to walk alongside you to this end. And I understand, it may be very well possible that this thing has taken your minds without your knowledge. However–” And her eyes close for a second, and she opens them again, and that radiant spark of silver fades, and her normal eye color returns. “We see ourselves with little choices. And I have very little allies at this point to achieve my goal.”

LAURA: (whispering) Oh, thank god.

MATT: “If we are to travel together, this one must walk in step the entire time. One single misstep, and I will not hesitate to carve that head from your body in the name of Bahamut."

ORION: I'm sorry. Do you mean like dancing?

TRAVIS: I will help you do that if he missteps.

MATT: Clarota, hands still crossed, takes a step down the stairs towards her. Its tendrils in its mouth kind of– (slurping SFX) (breathy voice) “And please, understand, if you ever intend to try and cut my life short, I will also not hesitate to bore that beautiful mind from your skull.”

LIAM: Once we murder this K'Varn, you guys are going to laugh so hard.

LAURA & MATT: (laugh)

SAM: So friends then?

ORION: Allies, allies.

TRAVIS: Allies, allies.

LAURA: Allies?

TALIESIN: I suppose everybody understands everyone now.

ORION: Allies. Clarota likes allies.

LAURA: Good times.

LIAM: The enemy of my enemy…

ORION: Is…

LAURA: Is my…

SAM: Has mind-sucking tentacles.

MATT: She looks back at the rest of you and gives you all an understanding look and a nod and she says, “I pray that you are right. I pray that you're honest and I pray that through some strange will of the gods, this entity is telling the truth. Because if it's not, none of us will make it out of here alive.”

LIAM: We're playing a game of chess here, Kima, and we will win.

LAURA: I whisper in her ear: “I would have chosen you.”

SAM: And I start humming 'Kumbaya'.

(all laughing)

SAM: (singing softly) Kumbaya, my lord. Kumbaya.

ORION: I take the dagger and make a happy face of fire.

MATT: She doesn't notice this, as she steps up the stairs towards Clarota.

LAURA: Oh god. Okay.

MATT: Clarota steps back, hands up in front, this little spark of arcane energy forming in his hands. Clarota [sic], bringing the sword up in front of her, pushes Clarota aside and continues ascending back up the stairs to the first level.

(offscreen thump)

MATT: –To the first level.

(all laugh)

ORION: Killing two guards on the way.

MATT: Clarota puts the hands folded back together. (unimpressed huff) (breathy voice) “Shall we?” And walks up the stairs after her. And you all begin to ascend back onto the first floor and that's where we'll end the game for this evening.

(Multiple groans and exclamations)

MARISHA: What? No. What time is it? I thought we just got started?

TRAVIS: I thought we were going to have to pick. We got like ten more minutes!

MARISHA: Yeah, we have ten more minutes.

SAM: No, no, no. That's fine, that's fine.

LAURA: No, yeah, that is a good place, or we're going to get in a battle.

MATT: (chuckles) Depending on where you guys are going next it could be a bit of a lengthy encounter, so…

LAURA: Oh god.

LIAM: So the building is empty.

MATT: It's totally empty.

LAURA: Completely empty.

LIAM: There's ghouls everywhere.

MATT: There's nobody in there. No one has any idea that you're here.

TRAVIS: Wait, show of hands, if we have to pick between one or the other, who's picking Kima?

ORION: Oh, Kima?

TRAVIS: Who's picking turtle-face?

LIAM: I don't know.

ORION: She's Allura's friend, right?

TRAVIS: We're going to throw down, this is gonna be Marvel versus DC in this bitch.

LAURA: She's Allura's friend, she's good!

LIAM: Undecided, I don't know.

LAURA: Would you pick Kima?

TRAVIS: Yeah!

LAURA: Okay, yeah.

SAM: You just want her because she's badass and you could hump her.

TRAVIS: Yeah!

(all laugh)

MATT: Oh, Grog.

LAURA: That would be the most awkward humping ever.

ORION: That's a good idea. Grog! You can go hump, I can get Allura.

LIAM: She can hump your leg.

TRAVIS: Did you see her work in that room of blood?

TALIESIN: Only one of them is demanding that I become a liar.

MARISHA: Isn't Kima a dwarf?

MATT: No, Kima is a halfling.

LAURA: Kima is a halfling.

MARISHA: Halfling?

LIAM: She's a ropy, muscular, halfling.

ASHLEY: Wait, dang it! I wanted to take some torture weapons!

MATT: You can go back if you want to.

ASHLEY: Yeah, can I go back since we have ten minutes and go get some torture weapons?

LIAM: What's it for?!

(all laugh)

MATT: This would be pretty quick, you have to grab some things as everyone is heading up the stairs.

LIAM: Who's your deity? Harvey Keitel?

(More laughing)

ASHLEY: No! Just for Grog!

MATT: So, Pike, the war priest, however, who the light of Sarenrae has guided her through her life, once a gifted being of light and joy, upon coming to the edge of death, her soul taken from her form and returned, going at sea and traveling with some of the more rough and tumble folks of the landscape, has returned now with her mind bent on war, vengeance–

TRAVIS: Yeah!

MATT: –and what it means to win a battle, through force if necessary. Watching Pike rush off and going to gather up what appear to be two large, bladed hooks–

ASHLEY: (hissing)

MATT: .–a lengthy hand-razor–

TALIESIN: Nice.

ASHLEY: Okay, wait, hold on. Lengthy hand-razor…

MARISHA: You're going to go Sweeney Todd all up in this shit.

LAURA: (mimicking Ashley) Hold on, hold on. Lengthy hand-razor.

(More laughter)

LIAM: A Milli Vanilli album, and…

ASHLEY: Wait, what was the first one?

MATT: Two large, pointed hooks that are about two feet in length. Almost like a bladed jai alai.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

MATT: And you gather a small bag of various instruments that are rusty and nasty.

LAURA: Ew.

MATT: There is just some leather pouch and you put that in your bag. It's all you have time to grab before you have to bolt back up to get to the rest.

TALIESIN: (swishing SFX)

MATT: And we'll pick up the next game as you guys head up the stairs back into the hallway you first entered in the center of the Emberhold duergar stronghold, Lady Kima released and a very tentative alliance. So, thank you guys all for watching.

ASHLEY: Whoo!

MARISHA: Pain in the ass, Lady Kima. Pain in my ass.

LAURA: Hey.

ZAC: Oh hey.

MATT: Hello, Zac!

ZAC: I was doing my little pop-ins here.

MATT: Yeah.

ZAC: So we had some donations to the charity.

MATT: Oh, that's awesome!

LAURA: Really?

MARISHA: Yeah!

MARISHA: Thanks guys.

ZAC: I have really terrible handwriting, so… So I wrote these myself and I'm supposed to read them and…

MATT: Right, right, that's okay.

ZAC: TheConman93.

MATT: Conman93, thank you!

ZAC: …Marilyn?

MATT: Marilyn, thank you!

ZAC: A123Junior.

MATT: A123Junior, appreciate it, buddy.

ZAC: Poltergeist123.

MATT: Poltergeist123, yeah. All good movies. First two.

ZAC: Almsnuffufin… Um, Eon? Something?

MATT: Yeah MisnurMenfrishunsen.

ZAC: AxisOfAnarchy…

MATT: Thank you. Nice, Axis.

ZAC: RuzGofDi.

MATT: RuzGofDi! Thank you guys so much for donating! Really appreciate it.

ZAC: Give to charity. Thank you.

MATT: Thank you, guys.

ZAC: So thank you guys for tuning in tonight and for all you front page viewers. We stream six to seven hours five to six days a week. We do a lot of varied programming, from comic book shows to tabletop gaming to Steam group games, indie gaming. All sorts of fun stuff. Every Friday night we have live music and bands play and stuff.

LAURA: Nice!

ZAC: And tomorrow we're having a special party to celebrate our reaching 2,000 subscribers.

MATT: Yeah. That's awesome.

(Cheering and clapping)

ZAC: You guys are all welcome to stop by.

MATT: We might just do that. Awesome.

ZAC: It's from sevem to nine we'll have a band playing, we're gonna do some fun group games. Probably play some inappropriate Cards Against Humanity. And Super Fight and stuff like that.

MATT: As if there was appropriate Cards Against Humanity.

ZAC: Every time I break it out, I'm like, I should never do this.

(all laugh)

MATT: I know. It's part of the fun. And we're every Thursday, seven o'clock, 7PM Pacific Standard Time. Usually we run about two and a half, three hours, our game sessions. So please come watch every Thursday. We love to have you guys.

ZAC: And for Team Hooman tomorrow is Ify Appreciation Day. So if you guys want to get on that. And for those that know Ify as sholfboys and not much else, Ify is a really prominent figure in the local comedy scene and he does a lot of work on shows like Key & Peele, Comedy Bang! Bang!, stuff like that. He's a really talented dude. You should look him up before you write those tweets just so you know more of what he's about. And we are going to throw that dropcam up and set up for dancing. If any of you want to stay, you're welcome to. If not, you're welcome to leave. No one is going to force you, except chatroom now that I brought it up.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: I mean, it's a good workout after all this food.

ZAC: You burn some calories after all that chicken, right?

ASHLEY: Burn some calories…

LAURA: Right, right.

MATT: Exactly.

ZAC: We are, I think, 20 away from a giveaway. So as long as we're live, the giveaway counts.

TRAVIS: Is valid.

MATT: Exactly.

ZAC: So, if you get 20 subs before we go offline we will ship this wherever you are in the world. So, let's throw the dropcam up!

MATT: Yeah guys, thank you so much! (kiss) 

Pre-Show

MATT: Hello, and welcome to this evening's episode of Critical Role! We'll be with you in just a second. Unfortunately we're down a Travis Willingham tonight, but in Grog's stead we have the rest of the party venturing forth into the Emberhold after just recently discovering Lady Kima. We shall see what happens very shortly, but in the meantime, let's go ahead and give you guys some character backstory.

[dramatic music]

ASHLEY: Pike grew up on the outskirts of town, near the Bramblewood. Her ancestors were a family of deep gnomes with quite an unfavorable reputation. Thievery, destruction, and trickery left them with the curse of the last name Trickfoot. Sarenrae, the goddess of healing and redemption, had other plans for Pike's great-great-grandfather Wilhand, who left his family at a young age after a dream, a dream that changed the course of the Trickfoot family. Wilhand devoted his life to Sarenrae, and pledged from then on that him and his family would live a life of service and devotion. As a child, Pike seemed to have an affinity to heal. Whether it was animals, people, or even flowers, she felt she had a purpose in making things whole that had once been broken. She studied and learned the ways to heal through divine magic. She lived a peaceful life, quiet and simple, until one day Wilhand was captured and almost killed by a group of goliath barbarians. One of the goliaths took a stand against the murder of the innocent gnome, and he himself was beaten, bloodied, and left for dead, abandoned by his herd. Wilhand went to Pike for help. She prayed and healed this barbarian as best she could, bringing him back to life. When he awoke, she discovered his name was Grog Strongjaw. After that, they were the best of friends, a rather unlikely pair. Little did she know that in a few years' time Grog would soon return the favor and bring her back from the clutches of death. (roaring, crunch) After being killed in battle, Pike felt angry. She wanted to be stronger so that it would never happen again. She spent four months at sea, training with the men and women aboard a ship called the Broken Howl. Gripping her holy symbol in one hand, and her morningstar in the other, this time, Pike is ready.

TRAVIS: Right, listen up! If you have ale, then you have a friend in Grog Strongjaw! A goliath of towering height and size, this barbarian has an appetite for the two great loves in his life: combat, women, and ale! [record scratch] Wait. Easily the brains of the group, Grog is often consulted for his vast knowledge of shapes, colors, and shiny things! Also ale. In his early years, armed with his two-handed greataxe, Grog often enjoyed proving his might amongst the ranks of his family's wandering herd. But after coming upon an unsuspecting elderly gnome in the woods, he objected to the killing of such an innocent life. A creature of impulse, Grog felt only pity for this– well, this terrified little thing. And his disobedience cost him dearly. Beaten bloody, and banished by the herd leader, his Uncle Kevdak, Grog was abandoned and left to die. Exiled from his herd, it was then that the relative of the very gnome he fought to save, saved him. It was the kindness of a gnome cleric named Pike that healed Grog, bringing him back from death's edge. And they have remained close friends ever since. Most nights, Grog can be found challenging entire taverns to wrestling matches! Or accompanying Scanlan to the nearest house where you pay for lady favors. Also ale!

MARISHA: A first impression of Keyleth would leave you with little information on the half-elven druid. You might even think that her social awkwardness due to her sheltered upbringing is kind of sweet. Of course, it would be unwise underestimate her based on first impressions. [thunder crack] Under that un-intimidating petite frame is a vicious beast waiting to be unleashed, whose natural powers have made even the fiercest of champions pee their pants, literally! Born to the Air Tribe of the Ashari people, Keyleth was raised with a deep love of nature and the elemental magics. It is her people's inherent duty to protect the delicate areas in Tal'Dorei where the four elemental planes begin to bleed with this realm. Since she was a little girl, she had quite a knack for air manipulation and beast shaping abilities. Well, if you consider kittens and flying squirrels to be little beasts...which, I do. Anyways, it wasn't long before the headmaster of the tribe, her father, Korrin, realized her true prodigious abilities and she was inveterated to succeed him as the next headmaster. Just like that, her jovial childhood was stripped and replaced with endless spell memorization, teachings from ancient traditions, and exceedingly high expectations. Every druid leader-to-be must embark on a journey to seek out the sister tribes in order to introduce and establish respect amongst the fellow headmasters. They call this the Aramente, or Noble Odyssey. When her father felt she was ready, he set her on the path to truly discovering herself, not knowing when, or if, she will ever return. As she hiked down the mountain towards Stilben, she meditated on the task ahead. Part of the Aramente is proving yourself a strong warrior, a valiant protector, and a wise and compassionate leader. With this knowledge, one thought plays in repeat in her mind: Is she even worthy?

TALIESIN: Percy was the third child of seven children, born to a noble family who lived far to the north in the ancient castle of Whitestone. With so many siblings to share the burdens of lordship, Percy turned his attention to the sciences, engineering, and naturalism. One day, a mysterious couple, named Lord and Lady Briarwood, came to court. During a feast held in their honor, the Briarwoods violently took control of the castle, killing or imprisoning everyone who would stand in their way. Percy awoke chained in the dungeon, only to be freed by his younger sister. Together they fled, chased by the Briarwoods' men. As they ran, Percy's sister took several arrows to the chest and fell. Percy kept running, eventually jumping into a freezing river and floating unconscious to freedom. He did not remember waking up on a fishing boat. He barely remembered the next two years, as he slowly made his way as far south as possible. Then one night, Percy had a dream: a roaring cloud of smoke offered him vengeance against those who destroyed his family. When he awoke, Percy began to design his first gun.

SAM: Oh, you haven't heard of Scanlan Shorthalt? Well, gird your loins, ladies, because he has his eye on you. A talented musician, master of disguise, and dashingly handsome in his own mind, Scanlan sings songs almost as much as he sings his own praises. Born a poor gnome, Scanlan used his endless charm and soaring tenor voice to croon for coin and support his single mother. One day, he was discovered by a half-orc promoter, and joined Dr. Dranzel's Spectacular Traveling Troupe where he learned the ways of the world, and honed his skills as a bard extraordinaire. A loner much of his life, Scanlan has never quite come to terms with the violent death of his mother at the hands of a goblin invasion. While his years on the road provided many, shall we say, educational experiences with the opposite sex, deep down Scanlan yearns for the one thing he's never known: the true love of a fellow gnome. Still, Scanlan considers himself a lover first, performer second, and fighter distant third. On the battlefield, he'll support his allies, but rarely draws blood, unless it's to protect fellow gnome, Pike. Count on Scanlan for a hearty laugh, a rollicking song, and a twinkle in his eye that melts hearts and makes the females swoon.

ORION: Greetings and salutations, I am Tiberius Stormwind. I hail from a town called Tyriex, located in the heart of Draconia. Born from a politically respected family, at the age of 15, I succeeded in passing the Sorcerer's Rite, showing prodigy-like control of my magic. The judges and the Draconian high council were amazed at how powerful my spells were for how long I had been training. At 20 years old, I was the youngest appointed member of the magic guild in Draconian history. For the next few years, I almost went mad from the malaise of being a guild member, as it's rather boring. However, one day I happened upon a chamber, unused for quite some time. In the room were stacks of books and maps of the surrounding cities and areas around the known world. For months, I would frequent the chamber, and learned of artifacts from legend. After a long period of research, I made a list of artifacts that caught my eye. I brought these findings to the high council and was told that all of the information in the chamber I had stumbled upon was either believed to be fiction, or unsolvable mysteries, and hence were lost forever. I found those answers to be unacceptable. A year later, I devised a ruse and managed to convince the city council to lend support in me leaving Draconia on a mission of peace and diplomacy for the surrounding kingdoms. Going from town to town and making friends and allies in and for the name of Draconia. Being a red dragonborn, I had quite the task on my hands in that respect, but it was exactly what I needed so I could explore the world and find these artifacts, as I felt the truth was out there. Some may describe me as buffoonish, but I say poppycock to all that. I am much sharper than most give me credit for. I just don't pay attention to things sometimes. I've also been known to be rather cunning, loyal, happy-go-lucky, and well, dangerous. I can't help but show my true scales every now and then. But overall, I think I'm quite friendly for a dragonborn.

LIAM: Never entirely welcome in the company of elves or men, Vax'ildan learned at a young age to skip past formality, preferring instead to invite himself in your door. Along with twin sister, Vex'ahlia, Vax was born by a chance encounter between elven royalty and human peasantry. Raised by their mother in their early years, the twins were eventually sent off to their father in the elven capital of Syngorn. But their cool reception among the elves there never warmed, and their time in the capital didn't last. The siblings stole away one autumn night and set out on the open road. After a few years of wandering, they eventually decided to return to their mother, and journeyed back to the lands of their youth. But instead of finding their childhood home, they returned to a pile of rubble. Their mother was gone, their home burned to ash. Pressing the townspeople for answers, they learned of the day the dragon came. With their ties all severed, Vax'ildan and his sister set out to find their fortune together in Tal'Dorei. An outsider since birth, Vax quickly learned to solve life's challenges in his own particular way, often by sidestepping them entirely. And when his knack for circumventing adversity isn't enough, the way of blades the elves schooled him in more than makes up the difference.

LAURA: Like so many half-elves, Vex'ahlia has spent most of her life suffering the cool reception of a people who don't fully accept her. Born of a human mother, and an elven father who only later in life took an interest in their existence, Vex'ahlia and her twin brother, Vax'ildan, quickly realized the only people they could truly rely on in this world were each other. It was at the age of ten when the two were taken from their mother, and brought to live in Syngorn, the isolated elven city for which their father was an ambassador. He quietly took them in, but always kept an icy distance, and after too many years of disdainful looks, the pair decided to leave his indifference behind, and set out on their own. Vax took to the cities, stealing small trinkets and learning the ways of the thief, while Vex kept to the woods. She preferred the isolation. Always the keen observer, she learned to hunt and to track, to spy and to shoot. Through a series of fateful events, earned herself a companion in the form of a bear– her own stolen Trinket – to fight alongside her and protect her fiercely. Also, he is adorable, and gives expert massages.

[dramatic music]

MATT: Hello everyone, and welcome back to the next episode of Critical Role. We unfortunately are down one Grog this evening, as I mentioned before.

ALL: (distressed noises)

MATT: We are missing him terribly. We'll see what terrors will transpire in his absence. However, though! We do have some fun things to announce real fast: first off, we're still giving away promo kits for every 50 subscribers we get, so we'll be having those randomly drawn from everyone in the chat room every time 50 subscribers are joined to the channel, I guess you would say. Also, every ten subscribers we're giving away Steam keys for different games, so also cool giveaways, which is kind of fun. I want to take a moment also to mention our… charity, there, that's the word I was looking for, it's been a long day.

(laughter)

MATT: Our charity, 826LA, which we're putting up links in the chat room for you guys if you're able to donate. It's a fantastic program that tutors children, helps with creative writing and general literacy skills. It's a wonderful program, you can look it up at 826LA, you should Google it, find the website, it has all the information you need. It's a really great charity and we're still pushing that through our show every week, so thank you for all who have donated, and if you have the opportunity to, I highly recommend it. Also! I wanted to let you guys know we have– Marisha wants to mention a cool sponsor tonight or at least a promotional push we're pushing.

MARISHA: Yes! Yes! Friends of the show, Espionage Cosmetics, hooked us all up with some awesome nerdy manicures. We'll tweet pictures of our nails, so yes, we're all wearing awesome nails and we're going to be doing a giveaway from Espionage. Their tabletop bath bombs, which are awesome d20s–

MATT: d10s, technically.

MARISHA: Oh, d10s– No, there's a d20! There's a d10 and there's a percentile die!

MATT: No, you're right! I saw the wrong side of it, my apologies. Forget I said anything.

MARISHA: So yes, and we'll probably also go ahead and throw in a Critical Role signed picture as well with this. What you have to do is tweet @EspionageMakeup, is their twitter, @EspionageMakeup and #CriticalRole, and tell them what your favorite character is from Critical Role and who your favorite nail wraps are today and then we'll pick at half-time a winner.

MATT: Indeed. So fantastic. I may have some more stuff down the road we'll be able to talk about but in the meantime, let's go ahead and get everyone caught up to speed with what has transpired recently on Critical Role.
Part I

MATT: So the party, to give you a quick overview for those who have just joined us, they were given a mission to seek out a female halfling paladin named Lady Kima of Vord, who had been missing, going on a vision quest, apparently seeking some deep, dark evil that had begun to simmer and grow beneath the dwarven city of Kraghammer. The party managed to make their way to the city, delve deep within its caverns to discover an entire series of caves, and what eventually led to the Underdark itself. A subterranean landscape of terror and darkness. After a series of battles with some duergar, which are kinda ashy-skinned evil dwarven offshoot people, characters, and a few brushes with some illithids or mind flayer creatures, they managed to befriend one, or I should say, ally with one named Clarota. Who has been traveling with them, who has apparently been kicked away from his society and wishes reentry to save them from the kind of ominous presence of this unseen, barely spoken entity called K'vorn. K'varn.

(laughter)

MATT: Long day. Long day. So upon traveling deep into the recesses–

SAM: Don't worry Matt, you just have to talk for three straight hours.

MATT: (laughs) I know. I know.

(laughter)

MARISHA: Your day is just getting started.

MATT: I know. But yes, so they have now, after a series of battles, found their way into the magma-covered, kind of obsidian jagged caverns where the Emberhold, the duergar fortress currently resides, where they believe Lady Kima was. Upon finding a way in, unfortunately announcing their presence to the fortress itself, they managed to find Lady Kima in a torture chamber beneath Emberhold, save her, slay her oppressor, and now they have, after a tenuous alliance was made– as Lady Kima and their mind-flayer friend Clarota are very much at odds– a very tenuous alliance was forged. And they now journey back up to the main basement floor, or main base floor of the Emberhold proper. And that's where we left off last time. So, hope you can absorb all that, guys. (laughs)

SAM: We are inside this fortress.

MATT: Correct.

SAM: We are moving towards the armory. We're trying to find the armory or something, is that right?

MATT: You're trying to find, essentially– Lady Kima has mentioned she wants to find the rest of her equipment that she says is either in an armory, or she mentioned a vault. And also she knows– she mentioned something about vengeance to those who run the keep. So she stormed up.

LAURA: We're following her, right?

MATT: You've followed her back into the base floor of the Emberhold itself. You all currently are now back kinda where you started after you snuck into the side passage of the Emberhold.

LAURA: And she said she would lead the way to the vault?

SAM: Can we be quiet for a second and see if there's any footsteps around us or guards marching around? Are we in immediate peril or do we have a second?

MATT: Certainly. Everyone go ahead and make an immediate perception roll.

SAM: Okay.

LAURA: So fast!

MARISHA: Website went live, if you want to announce that now or later.

MATT: Later. Two?

LAURA: No, 22! (laughs)

LIAM: 28.

ASHLEY: 13.

TALIESIN: 24.

ORION: Fail.

SAM: Ten. (laughs)

MATT: That's a fail! All right, so– You've got to be ready!

MARISHA: 27!

MATT: Okay.

(laughter)

SAM: I'm sure he'll give you half of that.

MATT: Nearly at the ready. All right, so as you all take a moment and kind of steel yourselves, your ears perk up and you can hear what sounds like echoes of distant footsteps down hallways, far out of sight. You hear some movement across the stone ceiling above you that eventually comes to a stop. And you wait for about a minute, and the entire place is now in a very eerie silence.

LIAM: They know we're here, still.

LAURA: But they don't know where we are.

LIAM: No.

ORION: Maybe they went to sleep?

TALIESIN: Lady Kima, do you remember where the vault is? Do you remember how we can get back there?

MATT: Kima turns to you, her eyes still peering back, and she's creeping towards the edge of the hallway. She looks back at you, briefly, and says, “I've only seen half of this stronghold before they captured me. As far as I know, probably somewhere on the second floor.”

LAURA: What floor are we on now?

MATT: “The ground floor.”

LIAM: The ground floor.

LAURA: Right, cool.

ASHLEY: So it's just one up?

(laughter)

MATT: “Apparently.”

LIAM: Were there stairs– When we went down that set of stairs there, was there also stairs going up right there, or stairs going up?

MATT: There were stairs– Right there? No. There were stairs going up in the first room you entered.

LAURA: Oh, right! So we could go back in the little storage room.

LIAM: We could.

LAURA: And go up.

LIAM: We should just spend the next three hours in the storage room.

LAURA: Let's go in the storage room and go up.

LIAM: Lady Kima, allow me to take a peek around the corner, see what's going on.

So I'm gonna go stealth.

MATT: Okay, go ahead and roll stealth.

LIAM: And inch past her. That's good. 29.

MATT: 29? All right. She begrudgingly steps back. You can see there's that eagerness to get in some sort of a fray or to feel somebody else bash along the side of this greatsword that she borrowed from you guys. She lets you pass. You creep up along the edge. As you do, you see– back here there is, in the middle of this hallway, a series of doorways, and what looks to be a large room in the center of the chamber where two duergar currently stand.

LIAM: I turn back to the group.

TALIESIN: (whispers) How about the other way?

SAM: Why don't we just kill them?

LIAM: Isn't that a corner– a dead-on corner right there?

MATT: This is another hallway.

LIAM: Another hallway.

SAM: Let's go kill the duergar.

LAURA: How dark is it in here? Is it like–

MATT: No. It's pretty dark in here. Like, with low light vision, you're able to see maybe a good 30 to 40 feet ahead of you. There are a few of those red crystal clusters that give off a little bit of light, incrementally, but duergar themselves, you've gotten to the point where you see they like it very, very dark. They actually aren't needing light. This is more of a courtesy to guests they may have.

LAURA: So potentially, brother, we could take them both out if you throw your knife and I do an arrow.

ORION: Wait, didn't we see further past that, 'cause that's where Grog did the–

(crushing noise)

SAM: No, this is the area that we haven't been in yet.

LIAM: I just put up a hand, and then slip around this direction and slip down this second hallway that you revealed.

MATT: All right. As you step past, you do see, this room here is a little ajar; the inside looks to be a storage room. There's just a series of boxes, barrels, and various–

LAURA: (gasps) Maybe you can put yourself in a box and walk around.

MARISHA: (gasps) Yes! Metal Gear Solid it!

LIAM: I continue to creep away from my sister, specifically.

MATT: All right, you glare down the side of this hallway. It leads to two other smaller rooms down the way, with a split towards the back end. There does not appear to be anybody visible in that hall.

LIAM: All right, I got this, I'm going to keep going.

SAM: Wait, what about us!?

LAURA: Why are you doing this?

MATT: All right, so you go past this way.

SAM: Jesus. Two duergar, we can take them out in a second!

MATT: Now this hallway, there appears to be an opening to this room, no doorway.

LAURA: Everybody wait while my brother goes on a field trip.

MATT: And this additional room, you do not currently see an entrance.

LIAM: An opening that's not a doorway? Or–

MATT: I mean, there isn't a door in the way, it's just an opening.

LIAM: The door is open. All right, so I'm going to press against the wall, up to the edge, wait for five seconds, see if I can hear anything, and then if not, curve around and peek in.

MATT: Perception roll.

LIAM: 20.

MATT: 20. You take a moment and listen. You hear what sounds like a light crackling of some sort of a fire? And the occasional dull ring of metal being hit against metal.

SAM: What was it? Metal against metal?

LIAM: Okay, I'm going to get low to the ground, and peek in the door.

MATT: All right. Peeking through, you do see, indeed, it is some sort of a smithy, with two kilns, or two anvils, set up, a work table in the center, and there is one lone duergar that, apparently, in the middle of his work, has not been paying attention to any of the ruckus going on around, and is just in the middle of hitting some sort of long, thick piece of black iron, and it's just, (ting ting), sweat dripping down the front of his brow, the room itself is– even against the corner of the doorway, you can tell the temperature is a lot warmer on the inside.

LIAM: And his back is to me, currently?

MATT: It's kinda to the side to you. He's currently looking– working out the anvil, banging down.

LIAM: So this way?

MATT: Yes.

LIAM: Oh, but I see the door on the other side, so I take the earring–

SAM: Oh, why don't you just keep going forever?

LIAM: – take the earring and I whisper to my sister, (whispers) follow along.

LAURA: Oh. I've been invited on the field trip, guys!

SAM: Just you?

LAURA: Just me!

SAM: Come on!

LAURA: Who else can stealth?

MARISHA: I'm a stealthy panther right now.

LAURA: Do you wanna be something and pop in my pocket? (laughs) That sounded wrong.

MATT: You haven't had a short rest yet, and you do–

MARISHA: (clears throat) I was gonna say, I'm still a cat form. But I can accompany you.

LAURA: I should not go with you, I can't stealth for shit right now.

(laughter)

LAURA: I rolled a seven.

LIAM: (whispers) Send Scanlan up.

LAURA: (whispers) Scanlan.

SAM: Huh, what?

LAURA: My brother's calling for you.

MATT: You feel the oppressive force of Clarota's voice in your heads simultaneously say, “I can also accompany.”

ASHLEY: Good plan. Good plan, Clarota.

SAM: All right. I'll step ahead and go invisible.

MATT: All right, so mark off your next Invisibility spell. As you vanish, Clarota also kind of waves his hand for a moment, and his image disappears the same way Scanlan's did.

SAM: Ooh! He does that too?

MATT: Apparently.

LAURA: What did he do?

SAM: He went invisible! (sings) We're walking down a hall, nobody's watching us.

(laughter)

MATT: As you're humming to yourself–

SAM: Oh no!

MATT: You make your way down and eventually towards the back of where Vax is pressed against the–

LIAM: I can feel Scanlan's flute pressing into my buttocks.

SAM: That's not my flute!

(laughter)

LIAM: So I turn to them, and then I start– I pass the door.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: I'm gonna go around the corner to that other door.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: And now I'm going to stab the duergar in the neck.

MATT: All right! Go ahead and roll for an attack!

LIAM: Natural 20, natural 20!

(cheering)

MATT: That's how you start the game.

MARISHA: It's a good day! I feel like it's gonna be a good day.

MATT: All righty. So go ahead and roll damage. This is a sneak attack, as he didn't– it was not aware you were there.

LIAM: I'll use my keen dagger, I think. Four plus seven is– This is a pencil, right? Okay, 11. Where– how do you make it work? 11.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: Eight, 13–

SAM: Get him in the neck so he can't yell.

LIAM: Ooh. 66.

MATT: You don't multiply the modifier. The modifier goes on at the end. So it's the dice roll plus your sneak attack, multiplied by two, and then the dex modifier at the end.

MARISHA: That's a lot!

LIAM: Okay.

MATT: Plus seven, I think, right at the end.

LIAM: Yeah, that's right. So it's the damage plus the sneak attack, double that–

MATT: And then add the plus seven at the end.

LAURA: That's 28 times two plus seven.

LIAM: 26.

MATT: Splitting hairs here! That's enough. So.

LIAM: One plus two plus two plus one.

MATT: So you hear this, 'Tink! Tink! Tink!' (pause) That's it. Without even a guttural noise, the dagger buries itself in the base of his skull. You see him just (grunts) and slump down to the ground.

LIAM: I catch the hammer and I start going 'Tink! Tink! Tink!' And wave the two invisible beings into the room.

ASHLEY: Hey! What happened in there?

SAM: We're here! We're ready to fight. What do you need us to do?

MATT: Kima at this point– You can see her hand kind of tensing around the sword as she looks back at Grog, whose hands are also wringing his greataxe. “I want to kill something!” She kind of backs off to the side and sees the other duergar that are there.

ASHLEY: (Grog voice) I want to rage!

MATT: And she's going to go ahead and run around.

LIAM: Don't waste my natural 20, Kima. Come on!

LAURA: Man, you can't control Kima!

MARISHA: This is why we don't have AI in the party, guys. You can't control the AI.

MATT: You know you guys are telling a very, very angry woman right now to be patient. Doesn't seem to make a ruckus.

LAURA: Can I sneak up to the corner at least, so I can be ready to attack those two bastards?

MATT: Over to here? All righty. Trinket, who hasn't seen you in a while, is sticking to your back.

LAURA: I sit there and I kind of pet him as I look around the corner.

MATT: Okay. Trinket is enjoying the petting. All right, so that duergar's down, the current armory section appears to be completely open and at your disposal. There are a series of partially made weapons kind of scattered in a pile. There are some ingots, and even some raw iron material in the far corner. Other than that, it just looks like your general smithing workshop.

SAM: Is Kima with us now?

MATT: Kima is currently looking around this section with you guys.

SAM: Kima, do you see any of your equipment here that you wanted?

MATT: She glances around, goes and move some of the piles by, turning over the room as quietly as she can– not as quietly as you'd like– but quiet enough. “No. Nothing's here.”

SAM: Can't you just take one of these things and call it a day?

(laughter)

MATT: She glares in the direction of your voice.

SAM: I'm invisible, I–

MATT: “This will do me just fine for now!”

SAM: Oh!

MATT: “Right. Let's keep looking.” She leaves the room. She starts heading down this way–

LIAM: All right, I'm following after her, tiptoeing after her.

LAURA: We should go after her. 'Cause we're all gonna split up.

LIAM: Yeah, I speak into my earring and say zubba zubba zubba zubba.

LAURA: Let's all go in that back way and see if we can stealth around.

MATT: Okay. For everyone else, stealth check.

TALIESIN: Oh boy.

ASHLEY: Here we go!

ORION: Yes! Natural 20!

MATT: Disadvantage on you, Pike, because of your heavy armor.

ASHLEY: So that means I roll twice?

MATT: Roll twice, take the lower.

ASHLEY: I take the lower one.

ORION: Now as that happens, I want to cast Mage Hand and I want to cast Light on it, and I want to slowly have it drift down there.

MATT: They're both concentration spells. You can have one or the other.

ORION: Dagnabbit.

MATT: Mage Hand isn't an actual object, unfortunately.

ORION: Dagnabbit. Okay, fine. Instead I cast Prestidigitation and I make a little glowy orb, and it's a little flickery, and I cast– I think I can maybe try, what, 15 feet?

MATT: Okay. And where are you casting it? Just in the middle of this hallway here?

ORION: No. To my left.

MATT: Here?

SAM: He wants to see in the dark place.

ORION: I wanna see in the dark place.

MATT: There is no entrance to this room currently from what you can see. It's just a wall. There is a door on the opposite side.

SAM: Now it's a well-lit wall.

ORION: Hm. All right, well, I follow after the bear.

(laughter)

MATT: All right, so what was your stealth roll?

LAURA: Oh, it was 17.

MATT: 17. Roll for Trinket.

LAURA: Oh gosh.

SAM: (bear noises)

LAURA: I thought he just got what I got. Crap.

SAM: Not good.

LAURA: What do I add to it?

SAM: Nothing.

MATT: Add his dex modifier. Trinket's dex modifier.

LAURA: Okay, hold on. Hold on. Oh, good.

LIAM and LAURA: 11.

MATT: All right, as you guys are making your way down the hallway, slowly–

LAURA: I kinda clamp my hand over his mouth and tell him to shush.

MATT: You guys make your way down here. One of the duergar glances over–

SAM: Oh boy.

MATT: – utters something to the friend at his side and he goes–

LIAM: I heard the bear and I start sliding my back down along the wall.

LAURA: Oh crap. I turn around and notch my arrow for them.

MATT: Okay, Trinket moves past

TALIESIN: I walk up to the very, very edge of the hallway.

LIAM: And I'm stabbing! Stabbing, stabbing! Stabbing.

ORION: Matthew, behind the bear.

MATT: You move behind the bear?

ORION: Yes.

MATT: You are right there and they both see you.

ORION: No, no, the other bear. I mean, the other side of the bear.

MATT: As you're walking behind Trinket, all this transpires simultaneously. Right. And they saw the bear and then saw something move behind it. Their attention was got. They see you and they start walking towards–

LIAM: Stabbing duergars, stabbing duergars.

MATT: However, as they pass there, you get one shot at this guy as he passes past you. Go ahead and make your attack.

ORION: I wave at them.

MATT: Okay. (laughs) Tiberius waves at them.

MARISHA: I go ahead and move up next to Percy.

ORION: Hello. I don't think they're our friends.

MATT: Unfortunately, the space is a little limited for your size. You have to wait for the rest of them to let you by.

MARISHA: Oh, but Grog's behind me. He's not here, right? Where's Grog?

MATT: You're a big cat right now.

MARISHA: I'm a big kitty.

LIAM: I rolled a 15.

MATT: 15? 15 does barely hit.

LIAM: Okay, so same keen dagger.

MATT: As you go ahead, move around the corner and fire. Two arrows?

LAURA: 17.

MATT: All right. Second one? Same guy or different targets?

LAURA: Same target. He's right in front. That one hits too, that's 19.

MATT: Both hit, go ahead and roll damage on both.

LIAM: 32 for me.

MATT: Okay. So as you watch them both walk past you, one of them continues past with his hammer out, rushing towards whatever he sees moving at the end of the hallway, probably Tiberius after Trinket. The next one that comes past you, you reach around and just take your dagger and swing it across the back of his neck area. You manage to sever the base of the spine and he just crumples into a pile in front of you. The other one– Damage?

LAURA: 22 with the two arrows. Nine and 13.

MATT: Both arrows impact his chest. The duergar steps back for a second, surprised by the moment, looks really furious and begins to step forward, his size enlarging.

TALIESIN: I knock him right in the face with the butt of my gun as he rounds the corner.

MATT: All right. Go ahead and make a stealth check to see whether or not he sees you.

TALIESIN: I can't use my previous stealth roll?

MATT: Not for this point. This is an active combat.

TALIESIN: Damn it. Eight.

MATT: Okay. So you still get the attack, but you don't have advantage, 'cause he's aware you're there. As he's running past you, he glances and sees you in the corner of his eye and is preparing for the blows. Go ahead and roll your attack.

TALIESIN: What do I add to this, by the way? I've never done a physical attack.

MATT: You're hitting it with the blunt. Go ahead and roll a d20 and add your strength modifier and four.

TALIESIN: All right. Natural 20!

(cheering)

MARISHA: Look, it's flashing!

TALIESIN: It flashes if I hit a natural 20.

MATT: All right, so go ahead and roll damage. It is a 1d4 plus your strength modifier.

TALIESIN: So that would be 2d4 plus my strength modifier, because it's a natural 20.

MATT: Correct, yes.

TALIESIN: That's six points of damage.

MATT: Well, it's five on there, right?

TALIESIN: My strength modifier is one.

MATT: Okay, so that's five times two is ten plus one. 11 points of damage.

TALIESIN: 11 points of damage.

MATT: Which will do it. As the duergar sees you, is rushing past with his hammer, about to fall back and swing at you, you rush out from behind the corner with the blunt end of your weapon and just whack him in the side of the temple.

SAM: Girly scream.

ORION: What was that?

TALIESIN: (whispers) We're good, we're good.

MATT: Unconscious on the ground. Alive but unconscious.

ASHLEY: He's not dead? Can I– so he's at a disadvantage, basically?

MATT: He's incapacitated.

ASHLEY: So can I go up to him and slit his throat with my mace of disruption? To make sure he's dead?

MATT: If you'd like to?

ASHLEY: Yes, I want to.

MATT: Okay.

ASHLEY: Is that really bad, though?

MATT: Pike walks up and grabs the back of the duergar's hair, holds it back and using the jagged edge of her mace of disruption, tears open the throat of the duergar, which then spills all this blackish ichor across the ground.

LIAM: She went renegade, folks. She's gone renegade.

ASHLEY: I just wanted to make sure he didn't come after us.

MATT: Grog looks impressed but also slightly worried as the man who grew up alongside you. All right, so that happened.

LIAM: And then she says, okay, I'm gonna dismember the body. Hold on.

(laughter)

LAURA: Torture weapons.

SAM: Because I'm invisible in the thing with Lady Kima, I get up on a stool to see if I can catch some cleavage.

(laughter)

SAM: Just peek over, peek in.

MATT: The leather armor that she wore is a full torso-covering leather armor piece, I apologize.

SAM: (sighs) I give up.

MATT: Sorry, Scanlan. She is– Yeah, which by the way, I mean, it's not just so much the fact that Pike did it, it's the fact that Pike did it by running a jagged, blade-edged mace across someone's throat. It was less of a slice and more of a–

ASHLEY: Is Sarenrae gonna get really mad at me?

MATT: We'll see.

ASHLEY: They're really bad! If they're really bad guys, they were super bad. The duergar are so bad. She'd probably be happy–

ORION: Right, Pike, but man, that was rough.

MATT: We'll find out.

TALIESIN: He had a little duergar back at home.

MATT: So, given this case, now the rest of the party is able to move forward. This hallway now, you can only see about that far down with the current light source. You can see Kima is now moving across–

SAM: Aw, she's just going?

LAURA: Go listen– aw, she's still going that direction?

LIAM: All right. I'm tiptoe-jogging behind Kima.

MARISHA: Can we do something to slow her down?

SAM: I can stop her if you want?

MARISHA: Well, I mean, can we– I mean, we don't wanna stop her I just wanna be like, hey, slow, girl.

LAURA: She's– you know what? I bet she's pretty noisy too!

MATT: She's wearing leather armor, she's not very noisy right now.

LIAM: I carefully place a hand on Kima's shoulder, and do a little, sort of, curtsy motion. Allow me, I can–

MATT: Okay, as you do so she kinda stops and looks back over her shoulder and gives a begrudging nod. But you can see she's– there's shaking, her hand holding the greatsword is currently shaking with rage.

LIAM: I say– (silent) Two words, three syllables.

(laughter)

MATT: All right, so. Coasting down this hallway. It leads down to an open doorway and a closed doorway immediately to your right. And then the room to– actually, the doorway's to your left, and to the right you see another wall to another room that you don't have a doorway currently available.

LIAM: There's a door to my left and a door straight ahead, right?

MATT: Correct.

LIAM: Okay, I inch up to the closed door on the left and place my ear to the door and listen.

MATT: Okay, go ahead and make a perception check.

LIAM: Yeah, natural 20.

MARISHA: What?!

ASHLEY: Come on!

SAM: Yeah. It's gonna be one of those nights.

LAURA: I need that one! Oh my goodness.

TALIESIN: Don't. Jinx it.

MATT: I'm gon' kill all you.

LAURA: No!

(laughter)

MATT: You put your ear to the side, and you hear nothing.

LIAM: Okay. Do I sense any kind of– I'm checking for traps on the door.

MATT: Okay. Yup.

LIAM: Trap's perception, right? 26.

MATT: So the door itself does not appear to be trapped. It does appear to be locked, though.

LIAM: All right, well, I pull out my picks. And I get a three on that, so–

MATT: That's okay. It's a really, really, really crappy lock.

LAURA: Oh!

MATT: You notice that the door itself, it has a locking mechanism on it. It was kinda half-locked, and as you push, it opens up, into a commode.

LIAM: Aw, yes!

MATT: There's nobody in there. It is a room with what looks almost like a bench, with a series of holes cut into the bench. It's a communal–

LIAM: Well, I'm tempted to close the door for a moment, but I will press on instead.

SAM: Check for loot!

(laughter)

LAURA: Gross!

LIAM: All right, so I'm going to inch towards that open door ahead of me, see what's around the corner.

SAM: I'm gonna follow– I'm gonna inch up behind him as well. I'm still invisible, right? How long does that last?

MATT: Okay. It's concentration for quite some time, I believe.

MARISHA: Actually–

TALIESIN: Really quickly– Oh, do you want to go first?

MARISHA: No, you go.

TALIESIN: Does anyone want to hide these bodies that we've just scattered about–

LAURA: Yeah, that would be good!

MARISHA: Inside the loo.

TALIESIN: It's a perfect place for them to be interred.

LIAM: So, Pike, hold still, please.

ASHLEY: I'm not moving!

SAM: Pike, eviscerate the bodies!

MARISHA: Here, I'm gonna– I'll walk over, in tiger form, and I just grab one by the scruff and start dragging it.

MATT: Grog helps out. You guys move the two bodies slowly over into the restroom area.

MARISHA: Wait, we kinda prop them up to kinda like Weekend at Bernie's them, yeah, make them just look like they're, you know, passed out.

MATT: Okay, as they're both generally laying back, like they just got really drunk and barely found their way to the toilet.

SAM: And throats slit.

(laughter)

MATT: It's really rough blockage.

MARISHA: We take that one and kind of like lean him forward so you can't tell immediately.

MATT: Okay. All right, that's not a worry. You bring that up to that little area there. All right.

LIAM: Well done, there.

TALIESIN: Oh, thank you.

MATT: You guys move forward to that. Grog has come over here to be able to help. Now, looking down this hallway, here you can see–

SAM: Who we got, who we got?

MATT: This side opens up–

LAURA: All I want to do is find the damn treasure room.

MATT: Looking into this room, it appears to be a barracks. A room that is just filled with different beds, all apparently empty.

LAURA: Oh, they're up and looking for us.

MARISHA: Apparently empty?

MATT: From what you can see.

MARISHA: Can I use my keen smell to see if I smell any duergar in there?

MATT: Sure. So you slowly approach the door using your keen senses, which opens up this hallway a little bit visibly to you. You can see it goes back quite a bit. Sniffing this room, you can tell that there were duergar there recently. Apparently, at the moment, though, there is no immediate scent that matches a duergar. So the room, for the most part, has been completely evacuated.

MARISHA: Okay, I kinda– even though I'm not a dog, I'm a cat, I still kinda point. I go into pointer face. You know? Like–

ORION: Pointer face?

MARISHA: You know, like a pointer.

LIAM: Yeah, angling your nose forward, all right.

SAM: I think Keyleth has to pee.

(laughter)

SAM: I never had a cat.

LIAM: All right, I'm gonna start sliding down that hall there, ignoring this other passage, and get up to the door and again place my ear to it. Oh look, there's the front entrance.

MATT: As you look to your right, this is a large foyer-type area with two red carpets that are rolled on the sides of it that lead to the front of the main double-sided, large ten-foot-tall stone doors of the front of the fortress. To your left, there is a double wooden door, about eight feet tall each side, about five feet wide, that are currently closed, leading into whatever this large chamber is immediately to your left.

SAM: Can I hang a right and go down that other hall?

TALIESIN: We should check out what's in that other hall.

SAM: Is there a door over there?

MATT: There are two doors, actually.

SAM: Closed?

MATT: Both closed.

SAM: I'm going to listen into those doors.

MATT: Make a perception check.

SAM: Natural 17.

(cheering)

MARISHA: Gotta love that nat 17.

MATT: Listening in, you don't hear any noise.

SAM: That could mean nothing.

LIAM: Are you at the double doors with me?

SAM: I'm to the right. I went the other way.

LIAM: Okay. I'm going to listen at the big wooden doors, and I rolled, oh, not that great. 17.

MATT: All right. Listening in–

ORION: I scootch up ahead of Grog like, excuse me, excuse me.

MATT: As you listen back, there is no noise internally, except for the slight squeak as you put yourself against the door. It shifts a little bit, making no noticeable noise, but it appears the doors are unlocked, or there is no lock.

LAURA: Oh no.

MATT: You're not hearing anything from inside that one door you're at.

SAM: Wait, I just heard a noise?

MATT: No, you hear no noise coming from that room.

SAM: Oh, okay. Stinking Cloud, can I go through doors, or do I have to see what I'm casting it at?

MATT: You have to have sight, unfortunately. I mean, you could peek very low.

SAM: I'm going to open the door and look.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: 'Cause why not?

MATT: You open the door. It appears to be some sort of a guest bedroom. It's a singular bed that's in much better condition than the barracks, it's empty, it's well-made. It's more lit than the other rooms. It seems to be a room that's designed for either non-duergar riff-raff or general soldiers or guests or people that would come to the fortress to stay, so.

SAM: Okay.

LIAM: I'm going to try to peer into the door, and I haven't talked about this before, but I'm wearing a cloak of elvenkind, which means I have advantage on stealth, and enemies have disadvantage on spotting me, so I'm going to lean my head in.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: Do I need to roll for stealth or am I already stealthed?

MATT: For this, you're already stealthed. So as you glance inside the room, you see what appears to be a great hall of some kind. There are large wooden tables, there is a fire pit in the center that has a number of mostly burned wood that is mainly just small darkened embers with a little bit of glowing yellow and red to it. There are stools scattered about the room, you can see there are remnants of some of a meal that hasn't been fully cleaned up yet on some of the tables. But the room appears to be empty. You do see a slight glimmer across the way on one of the tables.

LIAM: Oh, I'm going to go check it out.

LAURA: (whispers) Get the sparkly thing.

MATT: All right. Everyone else, what are you doing?

SAM: Can I look around the guest bedroom? Just kinda snoop around up in things?

LAURA: Can I ask him, I'm asking you what you see in there. What do you see in there?

LIAM: I don't know yet, hold on

LAURA: Is it sparkly?

LIAM: I'm going to try to sense for traps in this room.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: I'm going to snoop in the barracks.

MATT: Snoop in the barracks.

LIAM: 14.

ORION: I'm going to make my way around all this riff-raff, uh, no, uh, yes.

MATT: You push your way through. “Excuse me, excuse me, pardon me.” Pushing through everybody.

ORION: I'm going to go past where Vax is in the room down that hallway, then I'm going to do my Mage Hand thingy again. Oh, my Prestidigitation.

MATT: Down this hallway?

ORION: Mm-hm.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: Slowly, five feet by five feet.

MATT: All right. You see slowly, as you move down this hallway to check it out, a secondary set of barracks that are also apparently empty.

LAURA: Where are they? The stairs are up in the storage room, man. That's where we just were.

MATT: You see a secondary commode that is open. And as you glance around the corner as the light passes by you see there are two duergar currently coming down the hallway this direction.

MARISHA: Oh shit!

ORION: I just stop! And I creep back.

MATT: Okay. As you creep back, you hear footsteps coming your way quickly.

LIAM: I'm going to the door, then, I can hear that. Inside the door, inside the door.

MATT: Oh, inside the door there?

MARISHA: I'm going to stay actually right there, just right at the threshold.

MATT: Okay. The rest of you guys?

LAURA: I mean, I'm so far away. I can try to get up there but–

MATT: You can glance, there's still a hallway around that way if you wanted to go around.

LAURA: Okay. I'll go around the back way then.

MATT: Okay, so you move around–

LAURA: With Trinket!

MATT: Trinket follows up behind. Makes your way up there. Scanlan, you staying in that room?

SAM: I'm taking a dump on the guest bed.

(laughter)

ORION: They don't see me, right?

LAURA: I like walk by the door and see that happening (laughter)

SAM: But also just covering it up with a blanket afterwards.

MATT: Okay, well, you're in mid-process, this is all happening very quickly.

SAM: Oh. (grunts)

ASHLEY: I'll go around back behind where Trinket and Vex just went.

MATT: Okay. Because of your little legs you get about that far. Your little legs carry you.

SAM: I'm invisible. It's poop.

(laughter)

MATT: (sighs)

(grunting and laughter)

MARISHA: It's apparating poo.

TALIESIN: I'm staying in the hallway,

SAM: Scanlan's just like, I hate this mission.

MATT: Okay, so. Tiberius, as you're backing up, both the duergar turn around immediately, seeing you, and rear back with javelins, throwing them directly at you.

ORION: Oh! I'll cast Blur instead.

MATT: Okay. Go ahead and roll initiative real fast to see who gets off first what.

ORION: I'm not going to count that. Oh, I'll count that. 19.

(laughter)

MATT: What, why didn't you count it?

ORION: Because it flew out of my hand, I didn't roll it.

MATT: Okay. All right.

ORION: Yeah.

(laughter)

ORION: It's on camera, tell them to play back.

MATT: So you go ahead and cast Blur. You guys see as Tiberius comes running back, (startled sounds). He manages to cast a spell really fast as two javelins come flying towards him. His visible image begins to actually blur; the outline looks almost like there's two mirror images of Tiberius in the same place that are both shimmering and preventing them from actually telling where he's actually standing. The first javelin comes in at a 14.

ORION: Nope.

MATT: Second one comes in at a 17.

ORION: 17. Yes.

MATT: Oh sorry, no, it's a four, 'cause it has disadvantage. So both javelins just whish past. Looks like they pierced part of that kinda shimmering blurring form, but both just ricochet off the walls of stone and come clattering to the ground. Kinda near back where Kima and Grog are. They both step out of the way as they land.

MARISHA: Ha-ha.

MATT: All right, so that brings us to– that was your action. Who else wants to take the next action?

LIAM: I'm gonna hold.

LAURA: I can't see anything, can I, from where I am?

MATT: It's kinda dark, and you can see movement in the distance.

LAURA: Can I hop on Trinket's back and see if I can see higher?

MATT: You can try. All right. So you hop on the back of Trinket, (laughs) looking over the top, and you know Grog is kinda blocking part of your view, but you can see, with your low-light vision, what looks to be Tiberius' form shimmering and two duergar-height individuals that are partially blocked by him. So they do have partial cover, or three-quarters cover. Do you have the feat that ignores that?

LAURA: I don't know? I don't know.

MATT: (laughs) Because you don't know I'm going to say no.

TALIESIN: It would be called Sharpshooter.

MATT: Yeah it would be called Sharpshooter, is the feat.

LAURA: No, I don't have that.

MATT: Okay, yeah. So go ahead and roll for attack on one or both duergar, up to you.

LAURA: 21.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: And 23.

MATT: Okay. The 21 misses, the 23 hits. Because they have cover and because it's so dark it's difficult to make out their form, but you do manage to hit one with the arrow.

LAURA: Okay. I Hunter's Mark him.

MATT: Okay. Next time, make sure you do that before you attack. Otherwise it won't count for the attack.

LAURA: Okay. Okay. 13, uh, 12! (laughs) Math! Stay in school.

MATT: (laughs) All right. There you go. 12, then add your Hunter's Mark bonus to that as well.

LAURA: Oh, good, one.

MATT: All right, gotcha. So one arrow sinks in the shoulder, but doesn't appear to be stopping his angry advance towards Tiberius. Let's see. You're staying where you are?

LIAM: Waiting.

MATT: All right. You guys are actually kind of like pinched off in the hallway right here, so as you guys are all kind of–

SAM: (strained) Don't say 'pinched off' to me.

(laughter)

MATT: – as you're doing this, Tiberius, you're right there. The two duergar catch up to you and both, now that their javelins are out of their hands, pull out their hammers with their bonus actions and come down at you with an attack each.

MARISHA: Run, Tiberius!

MATT: That's gonna be a six.

ORION: No.

MATT: And a 17.

ORION: 17 hits.

MATT: Okay, yeah, that Blur is saving you, man. All right, so as the one– both the duergar are kinda like swelling with frustration, anger. It's an ability, you've now gotten to the point where you can see, these duergar can actually temporarily increase their form for stronger blows and attacks. Comes and strikes you for 12 points of bludgeoning damage as the hammer comes cracking down, finding purchase on your torso, and it kinda pushes you back a few inches. That's gonna bruise tomorrow morning.

MARISHA: Can I do a combo move with Grog, assuming that he would agree with me that it's gonna be super cool?

MATT: He'd probably agree with you, what do you wanna do?

MARISHA: Okay. (laughs) Thanks, Grog! So since Grog's kind of there– Can we arrange like a fastball special, almost? So have him like kind of go up and crouch and I'm gonna bust out–

MATT: How are you going to communicate this to Grog?

MARISHA: He– with–

LIAM: (meows)

(laughter)

MATT: I'm gonna have to say, unfortunately, that's not gonna work out for this moment. Grog's attention is on the duergar and you are a giant cat.

LIAM: Hey, I'm gonna sneak behind Tiberius and stab that guy.

LAURA: It would've been so cool, though.

ASHLEY: That would've been really cool.

LIAM: And since Tiberius is there, I can get sneak attack damage, 'cause one of my allies is there–

MATT: All right, just a second there, you're still holding, let's finish Keyleth. So Keyleth, what are you doing?

MARISHA: Well, is Grog in my way?

MATT: Grog is there. You can attempt to leap over Grog.

MARISHA: I was wanting to vault off Grog's back, is what I was wanting to do.

MATT: You can do that without asking him.

MARISHA: Yeah, that's what I was going to do.

MATT: No, you were saying you wanted to tell Grog you were going to do that. But yes, you can still do it. So go ahead and roll an acrobatics check.

MARISHA: No, you asked how I was communicating it.

LAURA: Just do it, Keyleth!

MARISHA: So I'm gonna come out and I'm gonna vault off his back and try and do a pounce over top of Tiberius for that duergar that's closest to you. What am I rolling?

TALIESIN: Acrobatics.

MARISHA: Acrobatics? Is this an acrobatics thing?

MATT: Yes. From around the corner, you pull back, leap up, jump onto Grog's back and attempt to spring off of it.

MARISHA: 11.

MATT: 11, okay. (laughs) All right. So you jump off of Grog's back. Grog, not expecting it, instinctively ducks down and the force you push off, as he's not aware there's going to be a giant cat there–

MARISHA: Uh-huh.

MATT: – in doing so, it doesn't give you the momentum you need. You are able to jump over him and get kind of into center of the fray. But you do not have the pounce attack, unfortunately.

MARISHA: Okay. That's fine.

MATT: But it gets you there, at least.

MARISHA: Oh, can I not attack?

MATT: You can attack, yeah.

MARISHA: Okay, okay, okay. I'm gonna go ahead and do my bite attack.

MATT: Go for it.

MARISHA: I'm gonna go right for his throat. Still with the same intention that I had in mind.

MATT: Okay, this is the one that took the arrow from Laura.

MARISHA: Okay, 17.

MATT: 17? That hits. Go ahead and roll for damage.

MARISHA: 1d10 plus five. Where's my d10s? Ten damage. Piercing damage.

MATT: Ten piercing damage, all right. So, as you rush forward, you bite at him. You see he pulls back, but you get a big, meaty chunk of his forearm and clamp down, and you feel a snap, some sort of bone in the middle of his arm and he gives out a horrible– (yells) sound, as he takes the butt of his hammer and hits you on the snout. Doesn't do any damage, but it's enough to get you to kind of let go of your grip a little bit, and he rips his arm out of your jaws. Leaving that kind of nasty, irony taste of duergar blood, that you've now become accustomed to, unfortunately. That ends the round. Now you have Tiberius and a cat in your way.

MARISHA: (meows)

LIAM: Do the doors go in or out, that I'm by?

MATT: The doors go in.

LIAM: In. So I'm just gonna go like this (hinges creak) and throw a dagger and say peek-a-boo at the same time.

(laughter)

MATT: Okay. As you step out (fwip).

LIAM: That is a 29 to hit.

MATT: That does hit.

LIAM: Okay.

MATT: You do not get sneak attack bonus, unfortunately.

LIAM: Even though my ally is five feet away from him? I thought I remembered that rule.

MATT: You do if you are in melee with them.

LAURA: Oh, right.

MATT: You get the bonus if you're both like flanking them, or you're like harrying them in combat. Because you're at a distance, you don't get the bonus.

LIAM: Okay, so that is a nine. And then I'm going to follow– the nine of damage.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: And immediately follow up with my other dagger, which also hits.

MATT: All right, go ahead and roll damage on the second dagger. Which is 1d4 plus what?

LIAM: Six. That's a nine.

MATT: Nine, okay. So, after the guy rips his arm out of Keyleth's face, essentially, a dagger comes swinging out from behind the doorway, stabs him in the other shoulder. You see he looks down at it confused for a second, and as that dagger vanishes in a puff of dark smoke, returning to your– the side of your hilt, he looks up just in time to see the second dagger catch him right in the middle of the forehead, and he just falls onto his back at that point, unmoving. That duergar is stripped.

LAURA: What-what!

MATT: Who's up next? Who wants to do anything? Who hasn't done anything yet this action?

SAM: Is there is a door next to me for another room?

MATT: You're just finishing.

SAM: Oh, I'm just finishing, okay.

MATT: Sorry. So, Pike, have you done anything yet?

ASHLEY: Can I– Is there a door there? Somewhere, right there?

MATT: You move around here, there is a door over here, yes.

ASHLEY: I can't really do anything. Check it out, check it out.

LIAM: Yeah, bust in. You can't stealth.

MATT: The door is a secondary guest room.

LIAM: And now, poop on this bed.

ASHLEY: All right.

(laughter)

TALIESIN: I can't do anything that could make noise anyway.

MATT: It is a guest room of equal design and dressing as the one that Scanlan, you are unaware, is currently fouling.

(laughter)

ASHLEY: Maybe I get a sudden urge for some reason to just poo on the bed.

(laughter)

MATT: You can do what you want. Be aware, Pike as a character has her intent, the more you stray from that, the more it will have ramifications for her in the end.

ASHLEY: Yes, I know, I'm just kidding, That's not what, that's not what I want to do. I was just, had this feeling that Scanlan was doing something and I felt that–

SAM: She could probably hear, muffled from behind the door, (grunts).

ASHLEY: Okay, so I'll just– I guess I can't do anything while I'm in there, so? Can I just–

MATT: That's about as far as you're able to move. You can still use your action if you wanted to do anything, but right now your vision is currently fairly well-blocked by a woman and a bear, and a man the size of a bear.

ASHLEY: Yeah, okay, so I'll just hang out there.

MATT: Okay, so that brings us back to Kima, who currently doesn't have any sort of way of getting over there, kind of frustrating, trying to find a way over.

MARISHA: It's a narrow hallway.

MATT: Clarota, who is still invisible, is just gonna hold on that point.

ORION: As everybody is doing this, I'm going to– why are you blocking me, I'm not supposed to be this close to this thing! Keep going.

MATT: Okay, Percy! Stand there? All right, Tiberius, you're up.

ORION: Oh, like I was saying. Well, shit.

SAM: Aren't you right next to the guy? Kill him.

MATT: Do it quick, or we are gonna move for the next turn.

ORION: Okay, I'll just lift up my hand and go, Firebolt.

MATT: Okay, point-blank Firebolt. Go ahead and roll your spell attack.

ORION: Okay, okay, 20.

MATT: 20, all right. That'll hit, go ahead and roll for damage for the Firebolt.

ORION: Okay, ten, 18, 20, 21, 23.

MATT: 23 damage? All right. So as you instinctively pull back, you release the blast of Firebolt energy, the duergar who is currently harrying you with this warhammer takes the brunt of it right to the bottom of his face and his torso. The studded leather armor that he's wearing tears open with a sheer flaming burst of the impact of it, and you see most of his skin is charred and burned at that point. He reels back for a second, looking very, very hurt but not quite put down yet.

ORION: As my bonus action, I'm gonna spend two sorcery points and do it again. So I roll for that. It's a 22.

MATT: All right, the second blast, as he reaches back, before he can get a chance to get back to his feet, the second blast hits. This time, it sends him off his feet, flying about five to ten feet back, skidding across the ground.

ORION: 15 damage.

MATT: Yes, and that puts him, still on the floor, laid out with a burning, kind of crippling, crispy scent in the air of what was once a standing duergar, now dead and burning on the ground.

MARISHA: So once again I grab him by the scruff, take him, and put him in the bathroom.

LIAM: I give a couple of pats on Tiberius's shoulder and start to inch down the hall.

MATT: All right, as you guys are doing this, Scanlan steps out of the guest room, getting his pantaloons back on.

SAM: My invisible pantaloons.

MATT: Yes. You hear the footprints of Scanlan, you being still invisible, you essentially just–

SAM: I phantom pooped. Did I find anything in there, by the way?

LIAM: Just relief.

MATT: You found a fun way to prank duergar.

MARISHA: Oh, yeah, did I find anything in the barracks?

MATT: Over there? No.

TALIESIN: Did Liam– Did Vax find anything shiny in the room? The shiny thing.

LIAM: No, I got interrupted. That's a good idea, thanks for the reminder, Percy.

TALIESIN: You're welcome, yes.

LIAM: Checking for– I checked for traps before, but I can't remember what I rolled. I'm sure it was successful.

MATT: Go ahead and roll again.

(laughter)

LIAM: 17.

MATT: Okay, as you push the door open and get a glance inside of the main hall, you don't see any traps across the floor.

LIAM: Okay, I'm gonna go check out the shiny thing.

MATT: Okay. Everyone else staying out in the hallway?

SAM: I'm coming with him.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: If I can get there.

MATT: You manage to scoot through, dancing around folks, people kind of let you get by. Anyone else?

LAURA: Yeah, sure, I like shiny things.

MARISHA: I'm burying my shame, again. Burying the duergar.

MATT: So, you're dragging the duergar over in the–

TALIESIN: I'll go in, too.

ASHLEY: I'll follow, I'll follow.

LAURA: We're all going. It's a big, happy room.

LIAM: So say we all.

MARISHA: Well, I guess I'll go after I bury duergar.

MATT: Yes, as you guys step in here, move up towards the back corner, where there's the shiny glint. Tiberius, you stay inside or outside?

ORION: I'm going to wait for everybody to go inside.

MARISHA: We will be Team Outside Posse.

MATT: Kima walks in, Grog goes to start making his way in. As he does, you go over towards the glimmer. The glimmer on the table, you look, it's just formless and kind of this weird spark of light. It then vanishes, and the doors that you guys entered–

LAURA: (singsong) It's a trap.

MATT: – slam behind you, with Tiberius, Grog and Keyleth all kept outside of the room.

ASHLEY: No!

MATT: The rest of you guys, the flames go to darkness and the entire room goes pitch-black.

MARISHA: Oh, shit!

LAURA: Oh, no, we don't have light.

LIAM: In the darkness, I say, fuck!

(laughter)

LAURA: Stupid, stupid, stupid!

ORION: I motion to Grog and I'm like, you know what to do, damn it.

MATT: Grog's gonna go for the door, however, at this point in time, I'm going to ask for–

LAURA: Can we stealth? I mean, I guess we're all kind of–

SAM: Ask for?

LIAM: Roll for Deus ex Machina.

SAM: Oh, You're gonna ask the chat room something?

MATT: No, no, no. I'm not. I'm working out what's actually gonna happen here. All right, so, suddenly there is a cacophonous bit of pain streaking through Pike, Vex, and Clarota. Guys, go ahead and make an intelligence saving throw.

SAM: Intelligence?

LAURA: All of us?

SAM: Some sort of a mind thing.

LAURA: Oh, crud.

MARISHA: Intelligence.

LAURA: Oh, oh, oh! Oh, no, I don't get any advantage in this.

LIAM: 13.

MATT: Not you, just you two. So what's the–

TALIESIN: Never mind, that was such a good roll.

ASHLEY: What was that? That's a one. (laughs)

MATT: Okay.

ASHLEY: I rolled a one!

MATT: So in the darkness, suddenly there is this searing pain, like some sort of screaming sound is blasting you from the inside of your very mind. You two are both currently stunned.

LAURA: Oh, crud.

SAM: Who's you two?

LAURA: Me and Pike.

ASHLEY: I did bad things, I did bad things. I shouldn't have killed a man while he was down. Wait, so what does that– That means we just can't do anything, right?

MATT: On every turn, you get to try and break that, but right now neither of you can–

MARISHA: Every turn they have to try and break out of it? It keeps going? It's like a keep-going thing?

MATT: You both just sit there, grasping your heads, just screaming in pain as your body is unable to function or listen to any thought process. Clarota also unfortunately falls victim to this and is also unable to make any actions.

SAM: Oh boy!

LIAM: I'm pulling out my flametongue dagger to try to get a little bit of light in here.

MATT: All right, however– You, as you are currently pulling out your flametongue dagger, you feel a presence nearby, and with a little bit of embers around the fire, you see, out of nothing, a figure step into view that apparently was not visible but a moment before. A tall, lithe figure, with long limbs, fingers and a wrapping of facial tentacles coming towards your face.

SAM: It was invisible.

LIAM: I see him, I'm gonna stab, I'm just gonna stab.

MATT: Before you get the chance to stab, you get a surprise attack from this guy.

LAURA: Oh, no, what if he sucks our brains out?

MATT: All right, that comes to an 18 versus armor class.

LIAM: Yeah, he got me.

MATT: So, as you go back for your blade to pull it out, he grabs you by the shoulders and pulls you, and the tentacles wrap around your face and pull you into this horrible toothy maw. You feel this tearing pain sensation as its teeth begin to dig into your face.

ASHLEY: No, no, no, no.

LAURA: Oh my god, he's gonna die.

LIAM: That hurts. A lot.

MATT: You take 17 points of psychic damage as the actual presence of the tentacles pulling on your face, you feel it's kind of grabbing your brain and trying to hold it in place. You are currently considered grappled.

MARISHA: Son of a bitch.

MATT: Now, guys, everyone roll initiative. That was a surprise round.

MARISHA: Surprise round.

MATT: Yes.

MARISHA: 'Cause they got the drop on us

TALIESIN: That'll do.

ORION: What's going on in there? I hear lots of ruckus.

SAM: We'll be out in a minute.

ORION: Don't give me that, Scanlan. Oh. Scanlan, you can hear me. What's going on in there?

SAM: We're all dying.

ORION: I turn to Grog. They're all dying.

MATT: (laughs) All right, so 25 to 20?

SAM: No one.

MATT: All right, 25 to 20, no one– almost forgot, go ahead and make an intelligence saving throw.

LIAM: 23.

MATT: 23, all right, you feel the presence of its mind pressing into your brain and you manage to, through the pain of its tentacles pulling you towards its mouth, shrug off its current attempt to push into your mind.

LIAM: I'm thinking of the middle finger.

MATT: That's a good thing. Okay. So you're still grappled but you're not stunned.

SAM: Is he a piece on the board yet?

MATT: Both of them are now visible right there. All right, so, 25 to 20?

LAURA: Nobody.

MATT: 20 to 15?

LIAM: 17.

TALIESIN: 16.

ORION: 17.

MATT: 17 and 16, all right. So actually, Grog is going first. All right, and Percy. 15 to ten? Ten to five?

MARISHA: Oh, oh, wait, 13.

(laughter)

MARISHA: Sorry, I was thinking about shit.

MATT: That's okay. Ten to five?

LAURA: Nine.

TALIESIN: Thinking about shit.

MARISHA: Thinking about life and death. (laughs)

TALIESIN: Word.

MATT: All right.

SAM: Two.

ASHLEY: Oh, so did I. Best friends.

SAM: Besties. Twinsies.

ASHLEY: Gnomesies.

(laughter)

SAM: We're still– Mr. Dungeon Master, sir, this is all the same day. I don't get any of my spells back?

MATT: No, you guys have not rested. All right, so first, the top actually– Kima is at the top of the initiative order.

MARISHA: Kima, get it girl, get it, get it girl.

MATT: Kima angrily leaps on top of the table and goes running down with an angry yell, and leaps down toward the one that's currently grabbing onto you with its grapple. As she's running a little bit of light bursts, as you can see this divine energy begin to burst and glow off the edge of the greatsword that she's holding. She leaps down, and with a giant arc through the air that lights up that portion of the room with a brief sweep, the blade comes down towards– oh, that'll hit. Second attack also hits.

ASHLEY: Yes, go Kima.

MATT: So that comes to– okay, using her Divine Smite ability on top of that, she manages to deal 37 points of damage to it.

TALIESIN: Damn.

MATT: As she finishes both of her strikes simultaneously. The mindflayer, however, does not release its grasp on you. You are still considered grappled. That ends her turn. Grog now is gonna angrily attempt to bash into this door, is gonna make an– actually no, no athletics check, he's going to go into a rage and hitting away at the door.

(growling)

LIAM and LAURA: (Grog voice) I would like to rage.

(laughter)

MATT: All right, that puts a total of 32 points of damage, that's enough. So Grog just takes two big swings. The first one comes through, cracks the door in half, splitting it down the center. Rears back a second time, cleaves through the door entirely. What little bit is left on the hinges, he kicks out with his foot, leaving now this side completely open to the interior. He then moves in around Clarota. That's as far as he can get in this current turn. That brings us to Vax.

LIAM: What can I do while grappled, nothing until I'm ungrappled?

MATT: Well, no, you can try and make an acrobatics or athletics roll against them to try and break free.

LIAM: Okay, but then do I have an action once that's done or that's the action?

MATT: I'll let you use that as your move.

LIAM: All right, so I'm gonna try to use, I guess athletics is what I would do.

MATT: Or acrobatics, up to you, whichever's higher.

LIAM: Well, that would be acrobatics.

MATT: Acrobatics, then.

LIAM: 27.

MATT: 27?

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: That'll do it.

LIAM: Okay.

MATT: You manage to, just in that moment of it being struck with the two blade strikes from Lady Kima, you manage to pull your head free from its grasp. And just manage to right yourself now, the throbbing pain in your head of what you just narrowly avoided still there.

LIAM: Okay. Poison dagger in hand, I roll an 18. Does that hit?

MATT: Okay. 18. Currently that does hit, yes.

LIAM: I wanna grab him by the calamari and stab him in the eye.

(laughter)

MATT: Okay, go for it.

LIAM: That's what I did, so– and then if I'm five feet– if Kima's there, I can sneak attack according to the rules?

MATT: Correct.

LIAM: All right, so I'm gonna stab him in the eye. One. Plus the sneak attack damage is two, four,

ten, 13, 19, 38, plus seven– 45.

MATT: 45. All right. So, as you–

LIAM: With the poison dagger.

MATT: Right, the poison dagger. I think you've already used the daily poison ability on this.

LIAM: I don't remember, so it's just a stab.

MATT: Okay. So the 45 points of damage. You pull back and you jam it into the side of its eye. You can see as it rears back, a spray of dark-colored liquid kind of warms the side of your face. As you pull the blade back out it rears back and (growls). You can hear its voice piercing into your head going, “I will eat you one way or another!”

ASHLEY: No, you won't!

LAURA: Did it distract him enough that we lost our thingy?

MATT: That's your main attack?

LIAM: I mean, I would imagine between ungrappling and stabbing, is that it for me? Or do I get my second attack, I don't know?

MATT: You can get your second attack, I'm sorry.

LIAM: Okay, well I think, go fuck yourself, and stab again. Nine plus– 19.

MATT: 19? Yeah, that hits.

LIAM: Other eye, other eye. No sneak attack. Two plus– eight.

MATT: Eight. Okay. As it rears back and you hear it saying that, you pull back and you grab with your off hand the cluster of tentacles in the front of its face and pull it down. As you do, the inertia– you jam the blade into the other eye. As you do, you hear this blast burst of angry scream inside your head, before it goes dead cold, silent, and the mind flayer falls to the ground.

LIAM: I fucking hate these things!

MATT: All right. That brings us to Clarota, who's currently stunned and fails save, Clarota's still stunned. Tiberius.

ORION: I look through the door.

MATT: Look through the door.

ORION: What's going on in here? Are there any enemies I can see?

MATT: You can see over here, barely. It's very dark in the far corner, you can see just the shape of some humanoid there.

ORION: Oh. Okay, is he– (laughs)

MATT: What are you doing, Tiberius?

ORION: (laughs) How tall is the thing?

MATT: From what you can see, it's maybe roughly six, seven feet. Grog's blocking most of it.

ORION: No, like, we're in a bunker, right?

MATT: Right now, you're in this giant great hall with giant tables and stools everywhere.

ORION: And the ceiling is–

MATT: You can't see the ceiling right now, there's no light.

ORION: Oh.

MATT: The room is near pitch-black, like there's just very little light in there currently.

ORION: I will waltz in behind Grog.

MATT: All right.

ORION: I cast Light.

MATT: Okay. The room all of a sudden bursts into view, you can now see the walls, the ceiling– it's a smooth stone room. There is a large chandelier currently hanging from the top of the ceiling. It's about 25 feet up to the ceiling in this current room.

MARISHA: (gasps) There's a big chandelier. That's fun.

ORION: And now do I see that guy better?

MATT: You do, yes. You see now there is a mind flayer currently ducking behind one of the tables right now. You can see a number of your friends in the party are currently clutching their heads, silently screaming to themselves, unmoving.

ORION: Ah, right. There's another one of those guys over there!

MARISHA: Wait, there's another one?

ORION: Yes!

MARISHA: There's two?

MATT: There's two.

ORION: I spend three sorcerer points.

MATT: How many sorcerer points do you have left? You spent a lot over the past couple games.

ORION: No, I have not, because I didn't do anything last game, because I was all recharged.

MATT: That's true, actually. Okay. Just keep track of that. So how many do you have left?

ORION: I have eight right now. Now I'll spend it to go down to–

LAURA: Five.

ORION: Five. 'Cause math.

MATT: Okay, got you. Cool, good on you.

MARISHA: Fantasy math. Once again, 826LA, after-school tutoring. Good charity.

ORION: I could have used it. I cast my pillars, or Grand Columns, as I like to call it, and (piston sound) all the way up and smash that little bastard.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: Smashy smashy.

MATT: So what's the save you get past that for the spell?

ORION: He does a dex save, and he takes 6d6 damage, and the dex save is to see if he's pinned or not.

MATT: Right. It does make its save, I believe, it's 21?

ORION: Oh, my, what?

MATT: Rolled a 21 versus your DC of your spell, which I believe is not higher than 21.

ORION: No.

MATT: So yeah, so he still takes the damage, but is not pinned.

ORION: Which is 15, 18 points of damage.

MATT: Okay, 18 points of damage, and manages to pull out of the way just in time as it slams into him, he darts off and catches himself on the ground, kind of slowly levitating above the ground as he comes to a stop. The pillar then slams into the roof, this section here. Actually splinters part of the table, which is now kind of lifted off-kilter at an angle. Yup. It–

ORION: Oh, so that– does that mean he's in the air for a whole round? 'Cause how it works is, he's all the way up to that height, but he gets to come, or fall, back down if he makes the save. That's how– so he has to travel that distance, so does he cast Levitate as he's coming down?

MATT: How I'm playing it is, the impact of the pillar suddenly slamming in from underneath is what does the initial damage, and he manages to roll off before it slams into the ceiling. He kinda– So. However, that ends your turn. The mind flayer, now looking around and seeing the room lit up, seeing the entire group now in this room, looks around at everyone, puts its hands together and concentrates– and as it does you see its form (sucking noise) vanish.

MARISHA: Damn it!

MATT: A few seconds pass, you guys manage to shrug your stun, and Clarota as well.

ASHLEY: Whoa, what happened?

MARISHA: That's not good.

LAURA: What happened?

MARISHA: They really know we're here.

LAURA: We need to get out of this room, then.

TALIESIN: Let's just search the rest of this floor as quickly as possible.

MARISHA: As quickly as possible.

LAURA: Grog, can you always put down the dust of tracelessness?

MATT: “All right, I will.” He's doing his flower-girl moment. Passes behind you guys. All right, so, what is the current mode of action for you guys?

MARISHA: I'm going to go ahead and dart down this hall that we know is for sure empty.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: Exit the other side of the great hall that we're in.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: And I think we should all go back– we should go to the second floor.

MATT: Through here.

LIAM: Walking in that door.

MATT: You look through here and see what appears to be some sort of a kitchen. You can see shelf units, you can see what looks like a few tables, you can see some kitchen elements.

LIAM: I'm gonna walk all the way in, all the way in.

MATT: All right, you walk all the way in. There's a door towards the back–

LIAM: The right, what do I see?

MATT: The right, you see what looks to be a doorway that's partially open that leads to a staircase.

LIAM: Up or down?

MATT: Looks like it's going up.

MARISHA: And what's in this room? I'm looking over here.

MATT: Okay, you look over here. It's a double door that is currently closed.

TALIESIN: I will head in your direction as well.

ORION: Eight, two of my d6s to heal up.

MATT: You haven't taken a short rest yet. You have to– you guys have to stop and take ten minutes, 15 minutes to rest to do that, so–

SAM: I'm gonna look all over the great hall and see if there's any cool stuff in there.

MATT: Make a perception check.

LAURA: I think what we should do– Everyone, I think what we should do is make our way back to the initial storage room we were in and go up that stairway, because that one's hidden. It's by a hidden entrance, people aren't gonna think about that one as much as main stairways.

TALIESIN: I agree, I think we should– I agree with that, I just think we should check the rest of the floor as well. Just double-check everything, make sure we didn't miss the–

LIAM: Vax is heading back to the group.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: Percy and I are checking this room with the double doors. Do you have any trap checks to see if it's locked?

LIAM: I do!

MATT: Okay, so Percy and both you guys open this doorway. It opens up into what looks to be another smaller eating hall. This one's nicer, this one has one long table. This is probably where the more socially risen–

TALIESIN: Take a quick look around.

MARISHA: Yeah, anything in there?

MATT: Looks like it hasn't been used for a day or two.

TALIESIN: All right.

MARISHA: No cool goodies?

MATT: No current goodies in this area, no.

TALIESIN: So we'll go– just keep going down and check the rest of that hallway.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: There's a lot more, you guys. I think we should go find the vault on the second floor.

MATT: All right, you guys press down here. There apparently are now– you can see there's another set of double doors–

LIAM: Vax is following.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: I think I should gather the group and try to make it back to the other storage room. Just to get us out of this area specifically.

MATT: So you guys are all moving back with–

LAURA: Is that cool?

MATT: – Vex to return to the previous storage room?

MARISHA: We can do that. Yeah, go for it.

TALIESIN: And you'll hear us if anything goes wrong. Yeah, we'll power through it.

LAURA: Use your earring.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: I'll go ahead and very– I'm just gonna kinda use my keen sense– or sorry, my keen smell again to see if I can smell any duergar in the area.

MATT: Okay. Go ahead and make a perception check with advantage.

MARISHA: That's pretty good. Oh yeah, I'll take that first roll, which was seven– 27.

MATT: 27. You smell that on this floor, there doesn't appear to be any duergar in your immediate vicinity. There is a strong, lingering scent of them coming from the doorway that you're currently at.

MARISHA: A strong, lingering scent?

MATT: Correct, like it– you can kind of tell there was a recent moving of a large number of duergar.

MARISHA: But probably not present.

MATT: You don't know.

MARISHA: Whatever. I guess we'll see what's in here.

MATT: All righty.

MARISHA: Peeky, peeky.

LIAM: I kind of parkour past Percy.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: Parkour past Percy!

MARISHA: Parkour, parkour!

MATT: You open the doors into what appears to be a large temple chamber, a place of worship. What you see are a series of long, wooden benches that are arranged to look towards the center. There is an altar to the right that is a risen kind of stone dais, and in the center there is a stone table, an altar which has a piece of black cloth wrapped over it and something on top of it you can't see from this distance. In the center of the room there is a 12-foot-tall statue of what looks like an extremely strong armored duergar clutching a giant warhammer and a shield.

MARISHA: Hm. I'm gonna– oh wait, I'm a tiger.

MATT: Yup.

LIAM: I'm gonna perception check the room. Which is high. 27.

MATT: 27? There does not appear to be anybody inside this room.

LIAM: Screw this room.

MATT: However, do you have a religion–

TALIESIN: I would like to do a religion roll.

MATT: Roll religion, guys.

TALIESIN: Nine.

LIAM: Nine.

ASHLEY: Could I do a religion roll from where I am?

MATT: You are not over there, unfortunately.

MARISHA: That's what I was gonna do, is tell somebody to get Pike over here real quick.

LAURA: Do you guys have earrings?

ASHLEY: I can put on my sprinter's boots.

LIAM: Yeah, Pike, Pike? There's some sort of religious artifacts over here. Could use your expertise.

MATT: Pike, you make your way through, eventually coming down this hallway–

(clanking)

MARISHA: She's coming! I can hear her coming.

ASHLEY: Hey guys, I'm here! Did you know I was coming?

(laughter)

MATT: Go ahead and make a religion check.

LIAM: Don't stab anything.

ORION: I'm gonna follow suit, but slowly.

ASHLEY: 17.

MATT: All right. As you're heading that direction slowly, best that you can tell right now, this room is definitely a small temple built to– and the name kind of escapes you, the words trying to form in your head for a second, and then eventually you come to realize this is a chapel to Laduguer. Laduguer is the deity of the duergar. It's the god that basically freed them from their original enslavement from the illithids, and they worship as a pinnacle of power, strength, and conquest.

ORION: I make it up to where those guys are.

MATT: All right.

TALIESIN: Let's keep searching.

SAM: Hey, what's the darkness right next to me? Is there a door there? What is that?

MATT: There is a door right over here.

SAM: Oh. I'm gonna open it.

MATT: Okay. All right. So you go ahead and open the door. It opens up into what you can immediately see is a chamber that is some kind of magical laboratory. You see in the far corner, hunched, a robed duergar, and as you open the door, there's a slight sound, a click sound, and a jet of greenish fume begins to spray up into your face. Make a constitution save.

SAM: Oh, god. I don't even know what that is! (laughs) 15.

MATT: 15? All right. So you take 11 points of poison damage. However, you can feel the poison forcing its way into your lungs. You manage to back out of the cloud in time and cough it up and your general physical well-being– you resist most of the effects of the poison. However, this poison fume trap did appear to go off and as the smoke slowly dissipates, you hear a chuckle across the other side.

ORION: As I hear the noise, I–

MATT: You don't hear the noise, you're too far away.

ORION: Oh, shit.

MATT: You guys do hear it, though.

LAURA: Okay, I come over there and see what the– what just happened.

MATT: Okay, as you rush over, Scanlan's backed up away and you can see there's this chamber here.

LAURA: Is the poison still in the air, or is it–

MATT: It's dissipated at this point. It's thin enough. You still can smell it, and it smells awful, like a very, very heavy, electrical fire-type smell.

LAURA: So I can see that guy?

MATT: Yeah.

LAURA: So should I notch an arrow and try to hit him?

MATT: It's up to you. What're you going to do?

LAURA: All right, I attack him, then!

MATT: All right, go for it then.

ASHLEY: Attack him! Get him!

LAURA: Shabang! Oh, dang it, I didn't do it. I meant to Hunter's Mark him and transfer it over, but that's okay, I didn't say it.

MATT: You didn't say it this time.

LAURA: That's 30. For the first.

LIAM: You did say shabang.

LAURA: I did say shabang, and 16 for the second.

MATT: Okay, both hit. Go ahead and roll damage on each.

ASHLEY: Hit it.

(music flares up)

LAURA: Well, sort of. 15 and eight.

MATT: 15 and eight. All right.

LIAM: The music is on.

MATT: All right. So both arrows you've been firing over the top. He's kind of hard to see with the table and from being crouched in the corner, but both arrows still manage to barely make their mark. One kind of pins him against the wall, and he looks at his shoulder briefly, looks back at you, raises his hand, as he begins muttering something under his breath. As he does, your arrow (shnk) through his hand and he tries to shake it, and now he's pinned to the wall with an arrow in the middle of his hand.

LAURA and ASHLEY: Yeah!

LAURA: Trinket! Oh no, I used two attacks.

MATT: Yeah.

LAURA: Dang it.

MATT: You can still tell Trinket to move. What are you gonna do?

LAURA: No, no no, I'm gonna hold him there, 'cause he's already in the room.

MATT: Okay, got you. All right, so what are you guys doing over in the temple?

LIAM: Exiting.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: No! Look and see if there's anything cool, first. What was that thing that's covered up by the blanket on the altar?

MATT: You keep walking towards it?

MARISHA: Yeah. What's up with that?

MATT: You make your way, you look at the top of the dais where the altar is, and on top you can see the black cloth that is wrapped over it. The scent gets to you before the actual visual. It's freshly rotting flesh of some kind, and as you glance over, you can see there is a heart that has been cut from a body and it's at the point where the blood has coagulated and begin to become thick. It's roughly dwarven size.

MARISHA: I get up and I grab it in my mouth.

MATT: Okay. It tastes disgusting.

MARISHA: And then I walk over to Vax and I lay it at his feet. I kind of nudge it with my nose.

MATT: She got you a heart.

LIAM: I scritch Keyleth behind the ear, but nudge it aside with my toe and exit the room.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: I did scritch her ears, but I'm going to continue down to the end of the hall.

MATT: This way?

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: Okay, you make your way into what looks like a giant foyer, into a secondary entrance in the side of the fortress.

LIAM: I just walk all the way over to the corner, stealthing.

MATT: Make a stealth check.

LIAM: It's high, it's 28.

MATT: 28, got it, okay. So, as you make your way through, you eventually careen to this corner. You can see another hallway, what appears to be another room of some kind. You also glance back and see there are two sets of stairways that go up and down.

LIAM: What's behind me?

MATT: This is a giant foyer that leads outside of the fortress.

LIAM: And the edge of the map this way?

MATT: This way here? This way? This comes to an abrupt end at that point, a rocky wall into the mountain itself that it's buttressed up against.

LIAM: Okay, I'm gonna keep coming this way, stealthing.

MATT: All right. As you move through–

LAURA: What's happening with that dude I– are you doing all this while I just pin down–

LIAM: Yeah. I don't know what's going on back there. I'm just walking around.

MATT: So, you glance in this room. There's an open walkway and what appears to be another barrack section, also completely empty.

LIAM: Screw that. Do I see a door for this room that's still darkened out? Then I'm gonna keep sliding along the wall.

MATT: Okay, as you slide along here, to make your way around to a door there.

LIAM: Okay. Pressing my hand, just to see if I can check any for traps.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: 26.

MATT: 26, all right. The door does not appear to be trapped.

TALIESIN: I'm gonna be heading in that direction anyway.

MARISHA: Agreed. Same here.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: I would like to stealth through the door.

ORION: Before I leave, I carefully examine that statue.

MATT: Okay, what are you examining?

ORION: The facial features of the god, the deity, right? Is that what he is?

MATT: Yeah. Okay, so you look at the face of Laduguer. You can see it's very, very old, it's very well-crafted. You can see a lot of very meticulous craftsmanship went into its creation. It almost glistens with a perfection that is out of place in an area that is so covered in soot and various other volcanic activity-based mineral deposits.

ORION: I'm gonna do a quick arcana check, just to see if there's any kind of mystical thing around it or anything like that. And it's 19.

MATT: Okay. There is some sort of a hum to the air that has an arcane element to it, but you are unable to pinpoint what it necessarily means or what the source is.

ORION: Interesting. Knowing that, I kind of gather my thoughts and I head towards where the rest of the group is.

MATT: Okay, so, while you're opening the door, the mage in the far corner kind of looks about sporadically and looks down at the arrow in its hand and its shoulder and just kind of fearfully, “Wait wait wait! Wait. Stop. Don't attack. Let's have a conversation.”

LAURA: Speak fast. Before I kill you.

MATT: He leans forward, kind of pulling the arrow out of the doorway. (groans in pain) Starts hobbling towards you a little bit.

LAURA: Can we all– we go in the room and Trinket goes up next to him and, like, gets all up in his face?

MATT: Okay. As you both enter, both of you make constitution saving throws. As two more plumes of poison (pff) out of the ground as both you and Trinket walk in.

LIAM: Good.

LAURA: 15?

MATT: 15, okay. And for Trinket as well.

LAURA: Oh, I should've been so smart, but I wasn't.

(laughter)

LAURA: 14 for Trinket.

MATT: Okay. You take seven points of poison damage.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: Trinket, however, takes 14 points of poison damage.

LAURA: Oh man. What did I get, seven?

MATT: Seven. And Trinket is currently considered poisoned.

LAURA: Oh no!

SAM: What does that mean?

MATT: It means disadvantage on attack rolls, disadvantage on ability checks.

LAURA: That's okay.

MATT: And now there's a bear coughing and kind of thrashing about the room. The table it bumps into and it kind of topples over.

LAURA: Is this like a turn thing or can I do something?

MATT: Well, this is just a reactionary moment of you guys coughing and trying to get out of this poisonous fume.

LAURA: I mean, can I quickly cast Protection from Poison on Trinket?

MATT: You can, yes.

LAURA: Okay. I do that.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: And that cures it.

MATT: That completely removes the poison?

LAURA: Yes it does.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Yay Trinket!

MATT: Well done. So that's your action. You now, as you are checking the door and you open it up, you hear all this commotion going off to the side now. Scanlan, you're over there as well, watching as more plumes of these poisonous smoke bits.

SAM: If I get close to the door without going through it, can I see the guy?

MATT: You can move over and look, you can just barely make out his form. It is a dark room that is currently filled with a slowly dissipating green cloud so it's hard to make him out.

SAM: Okay, well then I will just– fuck (laughs). Well, if I can't see him then I will just yell at him.

MATT: All right.

SAM: I'll yell with Vicious Mockery. I don't like you very much for poisoning me and my friends, you're a poopy head!

(laughter)

MARISHA: So vicious.

LAURA: That is threatening.

MARISHA: Damn.

SAM: Ooh. That does seven points of damage.

MATT: Seven points from Vicious Mockery? All right!

(laughter)

MATT: I don't know how that works.

SAM: It's Vicious Mockery. It's an attack.

MATT: That's crazy.

LIAM: That's, like, 80 points of damage!

MARISHA: And who said that words couldn't hurt people?

TALIESIN: And bonus damage to his mother, wherever she may be.

MARISHA: Sticks and stones can break my bones, but words can hurt.

MATT: Okay. So it has to make a will saving throw, against your DC. It rolls a three. It does not. So, as you shout out into this room, the currently fearful duergar mage kind of glances, eyes slide about, hears these words and you see him wrack his head for a second with a sudden sense of self-loathing and disappointment.

(laughter)

MATT: His hands drop and it looks like for a minute his intent to begin muttering some sort of incantation is momentarily distracted.

ORION: Nice!

MATT: All right, awesome.

ASHLEY: Can I start moving back?

MATT: Yeah, you can start moving back this way.

LIAM: I hear that, but I'm still going to poke my head stealthily through the door and see what I see. Do I need a new stealth check or?

MATT: Yes you do.

LIAM: Okay, great. So that is a 32.

MATT: All right, you glance inside at what looks to be some sort of a training room. There are– most of the floor itself is stone, and in the far corner there is a large section that is mainly just sand and dirt and there are a number of wooden training structures. You know, various shields and wooden bars that are used as a means of training for weaponry. There's what looks like a giant rack of weapons, full of arms and stuff.

LIAM: Anything good-looking?

MATT: Go ahead and make a perception check.

LIAM: One.

MATT: Most of the materials in this room look like the basic duergar fare.

LIAM: These don't look very good.

TALIESIN: I was going to run in and take a look around anyway so–

MATT: (laughs) Okay. As you run in, go ahead and make a dexterity saving throw.

TALIESIN: God damn it. Okay.

SAM: (sings) Traps, traps, traps-traps-traps.

TALIESIN: 24.

MATT: All right, so. You take ten points of lightning damage as you feel a tile on the ground trigger and then spring up, and as it does, you hear this sudden high-pitched whine as blue energy streaks up from the floor, runs through your body. Thankfully, you manage to dive out of the way and touch the ground to ground the energy, minimizing the damage. But yeah, you triggered (laughs) triggered a trap plate. You're beginning to get the sense that a lot of this tactic of this fortress now has been to lead you guys through a–

MARISHA: Maze?

MATT: A maze of traps.

SAM: A labyrinth.

LIAM: Before we hurt ourselves any longer, we should–

LAURA: We've got to kill this guy. Or talk to him at least.

LIAM: We need to get to the main event here.

MATT: All right. At this point, Kima is now– As Kima hears you shouting all these curses into the room, Kima pushes past you, and pushes past you. You can see Kima coming into the room behind you guys. Steps over the broken table, down in front of the circle, and grabs the mage by the front of his robe, pulling him into her face. The mage at this point is still kind of reeling from the fact that you managed to strike him so deeply in the heart of his hearts.

SAM: He's just not a nice man.

MATT: However, Kima, with a look of absolute death in her face, grabs him and pulls him forward and says, “Listen, where is the rest of your fucking army?” She's going to make an intimidation check.

TALIESIN: Yeah! Damn.

MATT: He does not succeed in resisting that.

LAURA: Yes!

MATT: The duergar is pressed against the wall now, and she's slamming him against the back of a bookshelf. “Look, all right, they're waiting for you up there, all right? You're not going to survive this. At this point, the entire city's probably waiting for you in the outside of the fortress and those that are upstairs are well-prepared. Okay? Your best chance of survival is laying down your arms and surrendering. I'm looking out for your best interests here.”

LIAM: Kill this asshole.

MARISHA: Kill him.

MATT: Kima, who is still holding him against there, you can see her hand releases the scruff and he takes a deep breath for a second. But before he can finish exhaling, she goes in, immediately grabbing his throat and squeezing it extremely tight. As she does, you see his tongue, dangling out the side of his mouth (strangling noises) as she's cutting off his entire air supply. She pulls forward and takes the greatsword and begins to slowly push it into his abdomen. As she does, he starts screaming in terrible pain. You can see her just slowly pushing the blade through his body into the bookcase behind. As she does, she goes, "You're gonna tell me, right now, who they have waiting for us upstairs.” As she begins to push all the way to the hilt now, he's pinned up against the bookcase and probably a portion of the stonework behind him. He's now got blood pouring out the sides of his face and outside the front of his nose. The duergar being held up against the wall says, “Whatever you haven't killed. The army's probably up with the king himself. They're all waiting for you and I hope they piss on your body when they're done!” At which point she takes the blade and twists it. As she does, he gives this guttural yelp and his eyes just go blank. Blanker than the duergar eyes normally are.

ORION: I make it to the doorway and go, what is going on in here?

LAURA: Are there any– taking that in– any healing potions or anything in here that we could use?

MATT: Go ahead and make an investigation check.

SAM: Can I look at the door and see if the trap will go off again if we step through it again?

MATT: Perception check.

SAM: 20.

MATT: Looks like, from glancing about the room and getting a feel for it, there were three traps that were all placed directly at the front of the door, basically to give him a point of defense, they've all been trigger ed, so you don't have to worry about any more in this room.

LAURA: Is this still considered the Underdark?

MATT: This is, yes.

LAURA: Oh, cool!

SAM: I'm going to go in and look around some more.

MATT: You're looking around as well?

SAM: Look around for potions and stuff.

LAURA: Oh, that's considered the– aw, I could have been rolling twice for all these damn things!

MATT: (sings) Remember your abilities.

LAURA: (sings) 25.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: Who's the singer here, people?

MATT: Sorry, Scanlan. So, as Kima pulls the blade from its body, kicking it off the greatsword and wiping it across the leather on the side– the leather that you gave to her! And a little part of you is like, (sadly) hmm.

LIAM: That's all right. Worth it. This halfling's hot.

MATT: So you guys made your way back, Clarota's there, against the corner, and Grog rushes over, just feeling like he was ready for action. “What's going on?”

ASHLEY: You're too late.

MARISHA: This might be a good time to stop for a moment.

MATT: That's up to you guys, as I say, do you guys want to take a short rest?

LAURA: Did I find any potions? Did I find anything?

MATT: Yes. Glancing around the room, you manage to find two potions of healing, one potion of superior healing.

ALL: Ooh.

LAURA: What is that? That's major.

MARISHA: That's cool.

MATT: You also find one vial of some sort of weird, viscous yellow liquid that you cannot identify.

MARISHA: Oh, don't open that. Who knows how long those guards had to be staked out here? Don't open that.

SAM: Can I do a– can I investigate it or arcana it?

MATT: Sure, you can give it a go.

SAM: Yeah. That's a one.

LAURA: Oh good.

SAM: Oh wait, no, that's a seven. These dice are horrible. Anyway, it doesn't matter. It's bad.

MATT: It looks delicious. No, actually, you can't make out, it has some changing color as you kind of swirl the bottle and watch the texture inside shift and change with the centrifugal force. You can't make out anything about its intent, but it does feel like it's a potion created with some effect.

SAM: Tiberius, do you want to drink this?

ORION: No! What is it? I check it for 18.

SAM: For what?

ORION: For whatever you're trying to hand to me.

MATT: 18 arcana? Okay. You take a look at it. It definitely is magical, you don't have a lot of experience with alchemy but you gather that the effect that it would have upon imbibement would be to alter your physical form in some way, you just don't know the specific effects.

ORION: Absolutely, Scanlan, I'll take that for now. And I put it in my pouch.

TALIESIN: Let's take a short rest.

MATT: So, as you guys all kind of enter this room, this brief safe zone to take a short rest, if you feel you want to heal yourself up and regain any short rest-based abilities, do so.

MARISHA: Can we talk about what this duergar just told us?

LAURA: Can we go to the bathroom before we do that?

MATT: That's what I was going to say. We can return– So we're going to take a quick bathroom break, we're going to play the videos again, we'll return here in just a second, as the next element of the attack on Emberhold continues.

MARISHA: Oh, and this is your last chance because after the break we'll pick a winner for the Espionage giveaway. So, last chance if you want to tweet @EspionageMakeup and #CriticalRole and look at our sweet nails! They're awesome. They're cool.

MATT: (whispers) Galaxies! All right, see you guys in a second.

ORION: I have text and whatnot.
Break

[break]
Part II

MATT: Welcome back, guys! All right, so we've had ourselves sufficiently rested.

ZAC: Indeed we have. We have a Tabletop Promo Day kit to give away, because you guys got the 50 subs since we started today.

MATT: Which is awesome.

ZAC: And we'll give away another one with another signed poster at the end of the night if you get another 50. So we're about to give this away, but I just want to remind you guys to donate to 826LA. That's the group that Critical Role is supporting, and these guys are here out of the graces of their heart, and it would be very helpful for you guys to donate to them and show your love for Critical Role by donating to the charity. We'll post the link in the chat. Get those donations rolling!

MATT: Awesome.

ZAC: Zac out!

MATT: All right, thank you, Zac! Couple of quick things. You wanted to announce the Espionage–

MARISHA: Yes! Our winner for the Espionage Bath Bombs Tabletop from @espionagemakeup goes to (drumroll) Dani Carr. Who is @Eleine35. So, Dani, I'm pretty sure you follow me on Twitter, just PM me your address and I'll get these out to you. And thank you!

MATT: Yeah, did you follow him? Because you have to follow him–

MARISHA: Oh, I have to follow– Oh, well then I'll follow Dani right now.

MATT: Awesome! Also, as a heads-up, guys, we've had some people perpetually asking us about the shirts that we made.

ORION: You mean these shirts?

MATT: That shirt right there. So, we have a– it's a temporary– it's very basic, but we have up, if you guys ever want to go to critrole.com, we have a limited run of those shirts currently available for purchase.

MARISHA: Very limited, like once they're gone, they're gone.

LAURA: It's less than– probably less than 15 of each size, less than that, probably. It was a small amount.

LIAM: I was wearing mine earlier today and I only rolled 20s. Only.

MARISHA: It's true. So, it's www.critrole.com, and, yeah, and the site is still under construction, so. But we managed to rush it out, and I wanna give a huge shout-out to Michael Whitesman, who's a big friend of ours, for helping us make the website.

ORION: Thanks, Whitey!

MARISHA: @whitesly, if you want to bug him, and, yeah, so, if you buy–

ORION: That's his nickname! It's not like a–

MARISHA: Whitesly! His last name is Whitesly.

ORION: I know. But I said, “What's up Whitey,” like, to him personally, and then they look at me like, “Oh my lord, that's so racist.”

(laughter)

ORION: And I'm like, no, no, it's his nickname. It's okay.

MATT: That is actually his nickname.

LIAM: I'm just sad that you don't call me Whitey.

ORION: I mean, I can.

LIAM: Okay. Let's start. After this game.

MARISHA: Anyways. Anyways, you can go buy t-shirts now, which was the whole point of that. At critrole.com. And there's a limited run. Once they're gone, they're gone.

MATT: The cost includes shipping. We'll get– we're packaging them ourselves. We'll have, hopefully, more in the future, but this is the first attempt at trying to do something like this for you guys, so–

MARISHA: Yeah. We're doing this all ourselves just to, just 'cause– See how this works. You guys–

LAURA: And that includes the shipping, that's why the price is–

ASHLEY: So future t-shirts– Were you guys saying something, like it would be artwork from–

MARISHA: Yes, this was, we got this from @rusegafdi. He wore this at Tabletop Day, so–

LAURA: A very similar design, so yeah.

MARISHA: Yeah, so we're– we decided we're going to do, like, fan-designed t-shirts. So, once every so often, we'll do a fan-designed t-shirt, and yes. And then– but they'll all be limited, so yeah!

MATT: Yeah. Shipping, shipping is included with the price, guys, don't worry. But yeah. So, anyway, check that out! Thank you guys so much, and let's go ahead and get back to the game proper.

CREW: Hey, the t-shirts are sold out already. They're now sold out. They bought all of them.

MARISHA: T-shirts are sold out!

ORION: Wait, what?

TALIESIN: We didn't even finish telling you people!

LAURA: No they're not.

TALIESIN: Let us finish our sentence first!

MATT: Okay, so, so, so the limited run was very limited–

MARISHA: Holy shit!

MATT: I guess we'll have to order some more, then.

SAM: Uh, mental note: make more t-shirts.

MARISHA: We didn't know! We didn't know!

MATT: We were gauging interest. I guess there's interest.

MARISHA: I'm sorry! Now I almost feel guilty. Congratulations to the 100 people who got 'em.

ORION: Hold on. Tiberius is gonna work some magic, and then try to conjure up a few more. He was unaware there was a shortage of, of those– okay.

MATT: Sorry, guys, all right, well, we'll– thank you guys very much, we'll get more to you very soon.

MARISHA: I don't know what to say! Oh god, I'm like, going to cry.

LAURA: Second run, yeah! Just hashtag them critical role and we'll– oh, but if you're selling them already, there's somebody that's making really cool t-shirts on Redbubble, but if you're making them there, like, we can't print them too, so, like, just submit them to us, and then we can–

MATT: Yeah, we'll figure it out! Anyway, guys, thank you so much! Let's get to the game!

TALIESIN: Thank you! Cool!

SAM: Guys, guys, the chatroom just solved the Israeli-Palestinian conflict!

(laughter)

MATT: Thank you so much, chat! Nice.

TALIESIN: We've got a box of stuff coming right for you right now. Thank you.

MARISHA: Oh my god, I'm like, shaking.

MATT: All right, so. For all who didn't get 'em, we'll have more soon, I promise.

LIAM: Do you guys like D&D? What is that?

MARISHA: (laughs) We didn't know if people liked our show or not!

MATT: So. So. So, you've housed yourselves into this enchanting room, this magical laboratory, and taken about a 15-minute rest. You're able to use any of your unused hit dice to heal yourself up if need be. Any–

ASHLEY: Oh, well, where's everybody at? 'Cause maybe I can just do a– some healing up.

TALIESIN: I just spent a healing surge, so.

LAURA: Well, he's, well, as far as health goes–

LIAM: I'm low, yeah, I'm pretty low.

ASHLEY: Yeah, what are you at?

MATT: How many hit dice do you have left?

LIAM: I know, I have, I don't have that many left. I'm at, like– I accidentally erased it, but I believe I'm at 30?

ASHLEY: Ooh, yeah, you– I need to, I'll get on that. Anybody else? What's everybody at?

SAM: I can sing to you and give you an extra little roll.

LIAM: I'd like you to sing to me, either in the game or on another day.

SAM: Are you Vex or Vax? (laughs)

LIAM: I'm Vix.

SAM: All right, I'll sing to you and– are you gonna use a dice?

LIAM: Thank you. Ah, let me see how beautiful your song is

SAM: (sings) Heal the Vax, make him a better elf.

SAM and ASHLEY: (sings) For you and for me and the entire adventuring band.

SAM: (sings) There are duergar dying, if you cared enough for the adventurers, you'd bring Vax back to help us with the stabby-stab. Thank you, thank you, thank you.

LIAM: And please, vaccinate your kids.

(laughter)

LIAM: I mean, don't Vax-inate them.

MATT: Yeah, there's the difference. All right, so.

SAM: You get a 1d6 for that.

MATT: So, an extra 1d6 healing to anyone.

LIAM: Who needs more than one? Three, okay.

ASHLEY: I healed you, 18, which was actually low, but I rolled really high for each roll. That's my–

LIAM: Oh, thanks. That's very good. Okay, great, I am almost tip-top condition, thank you. I have a blister.

MATT: So, as you guys manage to pull yourself out of your rest mode, you now glance out, and the hallway's still quiet, you can hear the movement of footsteps up above you. What is your intent?

SAM: To win!

MARISHA: Okay. Wait, what are we gonna do, 'cause here's– there's an army waiting upstairs for us?

LIAM: They know we're up there, but Kima needs her stuff, and we need to kind of put an end to this problem.

MARISHA: I'm gonna hop out of tiger form, by the way, since we rested and stuff.

SAM: Wait, they're above us?

LIAM: Yeah, they're all upstairs, including the mind flayer who vanished from the room we're in, so I'm sure he told everyone what's going on. But they don't know we've found the secret entrance, so I think we should go– Vex'ahlia's correct, we should use the stairwell near the secret entrance.

ORION: Are we sure there's no other way out of here, through this particular floor? Is that the only exit?

LAURA: There's– I mean, there's the front entrance, there's that door over there, there's like two other stairways, but we should use this back one, by the back entrance.

LIAM: Also, Lady Kima, our purpose here was to find you, but your purpose is somewhat greater than our own. What do you suggest we do in this moment?

MATT: As she stands up, and she holds the greatsword and swings it a bit. “What I'm seeking lies deeper into this cavern. Whatever is at the heart of this illithid scourge.” And she glances over at Clarota– who's in the back corner, hands folded– and there's a slight mental hiss sound in her direction. “There's something far darker at the heart of this temple. I've seen it. But I have my thoughts and my ideas, but I need confirmation before I speak of any doom-saying. However, the link between those foul creatures and the assault that's currently mounting against Kraghammer lie upstairs at the center of this duergar people.”

SAM: Oh, here? Here at– where we are now? Yes, here?

MATT: “The link between this K'varn character–”

LIAM: And let me ask you this. We can be on the same page, we can go up and fuck shit up. However, your weapons and armor– would they be a great help? Should they be our short-term purpose, or should we just go up and try to end this problem?

MATT: “To be honest, we've entirely lost the element of surprise. I would not wish to sacrifice as foolishly for a few additional trinkets of my own when I feel that this should do well enough, as long as we manage to work together and be smart about this.”

LAURA: So we should potentially just leave this castle for now and go find K'varn, rest up–

SAM: No, no, no.

LIAM: No, Kima is saying this is the main event.

SAM: She just said there's a link upstairs. The link from– to K'varn that we need to–

LAURA: I get it! Okay. Yeah.

MATT: “How do you think K'varn is able to send these armies up again and again towards the back door of Kraghammer?”

LAURA: Right.

MATT: “Besides, if we go on and leave them as they are, who's to say they wouldn't come up behind us, and then we're fighting a two-sided front once we get there?”

LAURA: Then let's– We gotta go upstairs.

LIAM: Vox Machina, our years are short. Let's make good use of them.

SAM: Let's leave this decision up to Grog.

ORION: Absolutely not!

(laughter)

MATT: Grog's standing there clutching his greataxe. “I say, I haven't been able to kill much since we got here. Let's kill something!”

ORION: That's a terrible idea.

LAURA: Have some ale before we go out, Grog.

MATT: “Oh, yeah, of course.” And he goes into his bag of holding, and pulls out his now half-empty cask, and you see him frown as he hears it clink around. He pours everyone a small drink, to what is now an empty cask.

LAURA: This could potentially kill us all.

MATT: (as Grog) Vox Machina.

ALL: Vox Machina!

LAURA: Scanlan had a great idea, though. Should we talk about what Scanlan wants to do?

SAM: Ah, yes, I have an idea. But also, are there two stairs up to the top floor?

LIAM: There's multiple.

SAM: Perhaps we should use more than one. One, half of our band go up, create a diversion. The other half sneak up and kill, kill, kill. That's one option. The other option–

LIAM: Pike leads the diversion group.

ASHLEY: Definitely the stealthy ones with me.

(laughter)

SAM: Ah, I do have an idea about gaining the upper hand on our first meeting with this army that's upstairs. An intimidation technique of some sort.

MARISHA: You're not going to kill another pony, are you?

SAM: I can't anymore.

MARISHA: Good.

SAM: Much as I would love to. No, but we've heard over our eavesdropping that some of these duergar bastards are scared of that strange chimera sort of hodgepodge, human centipede thing? We could be one of those with a little bit of deception, and all of us sort of piling on each other. We could act like a big scary monster and go up and freak the fuck out of them.

MARISHA: Ah! That's actually a really good idea.

LAURA: – all of us piled on Grog and Trinket and you as the bases, and we become this–

SAM: They would probably be, at least for the moment, intimidated a bit, and we could get a few licks in before they realized we're just a pile of idiots running at them.

(laughter)

LAURA: I like it.

MARISHA: So we're basically gonna be like three kids Little Rascals-style on each other's shoulders with a giant coat?

SAM: But that could be the diversion, at least.

MARISHA: Okay, well then, why don't– I actually like this idea. Why don't we have a few of our stealthy members, why don't we have the twins be in the shadows, and picking people off while–

LAURA: That's true, 'cause I've got range, so that makes sense.

MARISHA: Right, why don't we have some of our ranged people– I'll transform. I can transform into– how about a giant scorpion? That sounds fun.

SAM: Can you transform into anything?

MARISHA: I can transform into beasts. They have to be beasts.

SAM: How about the type of beast that we know would scare them, like that big triceratops thing that we saw with the big metal thing on it.

MARISHA: I can be a rhinoceros– I can be, like– Can I do dinosaurs? I can be a dinosaur, right? That's a new thing I can be, right?

MATT: Up to a certain point.

LIAM: What if you were a scorpion, with a dragonborn tail sliding around and a gnome on your front leg and a–

MARISHA: Well here's, oh wait wait, okay, okay, okay, okay, okay, okay, hang on, hang on, hang on, this might be crazy– wonder what would happen if I drank that weird yellowish potion? While I'm a monster?

LAURA: No, It could be poison, though.

MARISHA: But I'm wondering if you can, like, if I can transform into a monster and then you with Polymorph can maybe just transform.

ORION: Stop talking, stop talking! Hold on.

(laughter)

MARISHA: You don't have to snap at me.

ORION: No, no, no, you're brilliant, your highness.

MARISHA: Oh, thank you. I mean.

ORION: I have an idea, I have an idea.

LIAM: We're off the rails, here.

LAURA: Tell it to us, Tiberius, what's the idea?

SAM: Does it involve shitting on a bed?

(laughter)

ORION: Eventually, actually, yes.

TALIESIN: Aren't you empty yet?

ORION: This is what's going to happen. As far as we know, they're all duergar up there, correct?

LAURA: Mostly, except for the mind flayers. And another big monster probably, they might have–

ASHLEY: Which I saw in a vision. I think that's what's controlling them

LAURA: Oh no, that's K'varn. No, no, no, he's at the other one.

ASHLEY: Sorry, read it wrong.

ORION: This is what will happen. Those who can go stealth, we will creep up there. I will go invisible myself. I will be in front. You closely behind me.

SAM: He has a name.

ORION: Vax. There we go. You closely behind me, and whoever else can stealth follows suit. I will cast Alter Self and turn myself into their god.

SAM: Their god?

ALL: K'varn?

MARISHA: But you don't know what he looks like.

LAURA: Oh, or into that other thingie.

ORION: I absolutely know what he looks like.

MATT: You mean Laduguer?

ORION: We just saw his statue.

MARISHA: Well. that's not K'varn though.

ORION: But that's who they worship. As I give my, whatever the hell I come up with to say at that particular time–

SAM: Maybe you should think it first, think it through first.

ORION: As soon as the mind flayers catch on, and I turn to Clarota, and I turn to Kima, that's when all of you will strike at them first. The rest of you will wait 'til I shoot off a couple of Fireballs at the duergar once they figure out we're full of crap. 'Cause I'm sure that might happen unless I'm super convincing, which I hope that's the case– But I think that's our best bet to keep a certain element of surprise.

MARISHA: So wait, so wait, are you going to be their god, and I'm still going to also be a crazy monster, as like your pet crazy monster, with our stealthy team, or just–

TALIESIN: I think the only thing better than their god would be their god on top of a giant scorpion.

LAURA and MARISHA: Ooh!

LIAM: I have faith in you, Tiberius.

MARISHA: You'll be like Xerxes.

ASHLEY: Can I cast, 'cause I've been wanting to use Thaumaturgy. Which can make your voice three times as louder.

MATT: At the moment he would be speaking, yeah.

ASHLEY: At the moment he'd be speaking, okay, so let's do that.

LAURA: Oh, that's going to be so cool.

MARISHA: Some theatrics.

LIAM: I love it when a good plan comes together.

SAM: So some of us are stealthing, you're being a big god who talks loud and is riding a scorpion.

ASHLEY: So maybe I'll tuck behind him, on top of you the scorpion, and then when you're getting ready to talk I'll just (whoosh) and then you'll– your voice will be, you know, you'll have–

LIAM: Yeah, that's good, that's good.

SAM: How about this– so, just to clarify, are we all going up the same staircase, or are we going up two separate staircases, Vex and Vax–

LAURA: I think we should just go up the same staircase. There's too many of them. If we split up we could just all die.

SAM: You don't know what– there could be a million rooms up there.

LIAM: We have no idea what's up there, but Tiberius has got a plan, I like it.

LAURA: If he's the god, we just go in behind him as the god.

ASHLEY: What if we did like your Dimension Door? Is it too not very god-like if he's coming up the staircase like, hey?

SAM: The Dimension Door's off the table.

LIAM: Tiberius, Tiberius. Tibs.

SAM: But don't use the god thing. But don't use the god thing until we get to the big group. The big thing, if you see a guard, don't turn into a god, you gotta see like more than five people before you turn into a god.

LIAM: Tiberius.

ORION: Yes, Vax?

LIAM: Do you intend to go up one of the other stairways? I believe this one by the entrance, the secret entrance we came in, will afford us the element of surprise. Do you think you want to go up one of the others?

ORION: No, let's go up that one.

LIAM: And make a distraction, right? Your plan is to make a distraction.

ORION: Yes, of course.

LIAM: You're a brave dragonborn.

MARISHA: I'm going to cast Pass Without a Trace on the party. Everyone stay close.

LIAM: Who's the stealth party, not you, you and me, you.

MARISHA: Well, all of us, all of us I guess, until we get upstairs.

LAURA: Potentially all of us will be stealthed except for Tiberius, and you who is a scorpion, and you who's riding behind Tiberius.

ASHLEY: I'm riding on her, so I probably won't be rolling for stealth.

MATT: Uh.

ASHLEY: Just kidding.

MATT: You'll be rolling.

ASHLEY: I probably won't roll well, just putting it out there.

MATT: You hear in the back of your mind this subtle, soft, echoing chuckle. “You're all crazy. I like it.”

(laughter)

MATT: At which point, Kima, who's listening to all this with a look of kind of awe and curiosity says, “You know, for once? I actually agree with the thing.”

(laughter)

MATT: “All right.” Takes her greatsword in her hands. “Lead the way.”

ASHLEY: So you guys are stealthing up first?

MARISHA: We all have Pass Without a Trace as long as you stand close enough.

LIAM: Wait, wait for the inspiration.

SAM: I have some inspiration dice to give out, that I can give out as bonus actions. Can I give it out before we go into battle?

MATT: I would say like momentarily, right beforehand.

SAM: Okay, good to know. But I can't mass give it out, just have to give it to one person.

MATT: It's one of those things where it has to be in the moment when the adrenaline's pumping, I think, for it to last into the combat.

SAM: Okay, and do we want to send Clarota and Kima off through a different staircase so we have at least a backup plan?

LAURA: No, no, no stick together. Too big of a group of an army upstairs to split us up.

LIAM: Don't split the party.

SAM: In those action movies, when there's one guy who goes away for a while, he comes back at the end and saves the day. If we did that–

LAURA: That's not going to be us!

LIAM: We few, we happy few.

(laughter)

LIAM: About to go and do something very stupid. Let's do it.

MATT: So you are venturing up which stairway?

LAURA: The secret one, the one by– in the storage room.

MATT: All right. So. You guys–

MARISHA: We got this. We got this.

LAURA: Oh no, Grog fell over. Oh my gosh.

MARISHA: It's been a good day. What are you going to say? Are you thinking about this? Think about something.

ORION: Okay.

MARISHA: Start thinking about this now.

LIAM: There are rooms up there.

TALIESIN: What's the name of the god again?

MARISHA: Laduguer.

ASHLEY: Can I take off my armor right now?

MATT: You'd become a soft target. All right, you guys all make your way up, and you're all squeezing into this tiny, tiny room. You're all shoulder-to-shoulder, essentially. You come up to the top area, there's a small box, and there is just a single stone door.

LAURA: Check for traps.

LIAM: Excuse me, sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry, excuse me Kima, sorry, sorry, All right, my hands are on the door. I'm going to check for traps on this door. I get a 21.

MATT: Okay, you take a moment and you place your hand along this stone surface. You find that there's a low hum to it.

LIAM: Careful, careful, careful.

MATT: And you can tell that there's a small, almost like a thin whisper of string laid across the very top of the stone, where the wall meets it.

LIAM: Of course I can, of course I can. I'm going to take care of this, hold on. Yeah, this is thieves' tools, correct? 26.

MATT: 26, okay. You come up and you find that this is a very, very fine hair trigger. This is actually a partial enchantment as part of a magical trap. You know that with the slightest hint of false vibration to it, the door shifting or hitting it in the wrong place will trigger whatever this trap is. And so you bring your tools up, you manage to place one at the base of each point at where this arcane silver thread lies across. Simultaneously, you take your daggers and place them underneath the thread at each ends and sever them both at the same time. The thin whisper of a string just slowly glides down and vanishes into a small sparkle of light.

SAM: Cut the red wire.

LIAM: I'm just going to lay my ear on the door and see what I can hear. That is 21.

MATT: Hearing it, you hear what sounds like a low mutter of somewhere in the neighbourhood of ten to 15 low voices, and the slow, small shuffling of many, many, many, many footsteps.

LIAM: Shuffling, you said? And if I listen for a moment, do I– does it continue?

MATT: It, kind of, couple of footsteps, some talking, soft footprints. You can hear the scraping of metal–

LIAM: And it's the only way we can go is through this door, right? We're all smooshed into this hallway–

MATT: There is a hallway this way.

LAURA: Oh, so we stealth down the other hall, we try.

LIAM: So I mooshed everyone away from this hall.

MATT: The whispers and voices aren't directly on the other side of this wall, they're just in that room echoing through, but you do hear a lot of people there. All right, so, what are you doing?

LAURA: Well, well, stealthing down that hallway. Can we check for traps, check for traps, I look, I'm perceiving.

MATT: (laughs) Roll for perceiving

(laughter)

LIAM: 23 for Vax.

LAURA: Oh, I get twice that, good. Oh, good, that was way better.

MATT: (laughs)

LAURA: Ten.

MATT: Okay, no traps.

LAURA: Yay!

MATT: You both glide your way up and peek around the corner. What you see immediately are six duergar all stationed in this hallway guarding what looks like two large doors and entrance to this main chamber. And they're all just standing there, weapons ready, looking around.

SAM: Wait, which is the main chamber that you just–

MATT: This big chamber here that you–

SAM: Oh, that we were listening to at the door.

LIAM: Vax sneaks back to the group and motions Tiberius over, and Keyleth over.

SAM: We're doing this?

LIAM: One moment, one moment. Lightning, Lightning, who knows Lightning?

MARISHA: Are you gonna try to Lightning Bolt an entire line?

LIAM: Do you know the magic of lightning? I've seen you do it before, I've seen you.

MARISHA: I do know it right now.

LIAM: You know it? Anyone who knows Lightning, I've seen it done on the battlefield with us, person to person to person.

SAM: I can do it.

MATT: Who is up once again, clearing his throat in your presence.

SAM: Hi! Scanlan here.

LIAM: Scanlan, you know how to harness the power of electricity.

SAM: I don't wanna brag, but I'm a regular Ben Franklin over here. He's a guy, he's a gnome I knew once.

MARISHA: Scanlan, can you and I focus our Call Lightning spells together? To Lightning these–

SAM: I mean, mine's so fricking powerful.

LIAM: If Scanlan and one of the others does Lightning at the same time and it goes through that line, we could drop them all at once.

LAURA: But that's noisy, they'll come out.

LIAM: It's not that noisy, it's not like armor banging around.

LAURA: I think it's gonna be noisy, it's not a stealthy attack.

TALIESIN: It's a quick way to get rid of six people, though.

ORION: Oh, is that what we need to do?

LIAM: There's a row of duergar around the corner, they're all in a line like Radio City, we just– if I can get– Scanlan, if you– what about you, Keyleth? Do I remember light– or do you bring it down from above? Tiberius.

ORION: What, what?

SAM: Do you want me to shock 'em?

ORION: Oh, I have an idea. Okay, I'll peek around.

MATT: Okay, make a stealth check.

ORION: Sweet.

MARISHA: You have plus ten because of my Pass Without a Trace.

LIAM: You've got six duergar in a row. Is there anything you can do that's–

ORION: 27.

MATT: That's when you see this long row of duergar that are all kind of armored and ready, guarding the front of this chamber.

ORION: I cast Watery Sphere at the end of the last guy and create a giant ball.

LIAM: Wait, you're doing it now?

ORION: What does it look like, Vax?

MATT: Okay, so this giant water sphere appears. At which side of the wall?

ORION: On the last guy. Yeah, and I draw it towards us.

LIAM: Vax is grabbing the gnome and tossing him out to the right, out here at the front of the group.

ORION: And I stop at the last guy.

MATT: Okay, as the water sphere begins to pull in. Saving throws, what's your DC?

ORION: My spell DC, 17.

MATT: This is a dexterity save? All right.

SAM: One at a time.

MATT: All of them fail!

(cheering)

MARISHA: This is gonna be cool, this is gonna be cool. It's gonna put them all in one spot.

SAM: They were already in a line.

MARISHA: No, now we can electrocute them and they're wet!

MATT: There is now an entire clustered sphere of water that is containing a mishmash of duergar.

MARISHA: Lightning Bolt!

MATT: Call Lightning. All right, so, as Keyleth, you step forward, out in the hallway, you bring your arm up and there's this small cluster of dark clouds beginning to form and swirl up on the top of the 20-foot hallway. As it swirls, you bring your arm downward, and there's a sudden crack of thunder, a loud blasting sound that echoes through the hallway. As the lightning strikes the center of the sphere, the water itself bursts as the actual cacophonous blast of the lightning loosely shakes the aquatic sphere. However, go ahead and roll damage.

MARISHA: Do I get any more damage because of the–

MATT: You get an additional two dice of damage to each one of the duergar because they are contained in the water.

ORION: Yeah!

MARISHA: So 5d10?

MATT: Correct.

MARISHA: Do I roll for each one?

MATT: You just roll once, and that's across the board for all of them, and they are at a disadvantage because they are in the sphere.

MARISHA: Oh, and they're at a disadvantage?

ORION: Yeah, yeah, because I'm like holding them up.

MARISHA: All right.

MATT: It's really funny, because two of them rolled 20s in a row, but they're at a disadvantage.

MARISHA: Nice. Not too shabby. So we have ten, 19 plus 18, bringing it to 28 plus three, 31 plus one. 32.

MATT: Okay. So the sphere explodes, the actual stone on the ground you can feel shake and shudder with the impact of the lightning storm. All but one of the duergar are blown apart and scattered across the wall Akira-style, just (splat) against the walls. One of them is still in the center of the sphere, now looking charred and burnt, and eyes wide open with anger and frustration.

MARISHA: Scanlan, go!

SAM: I say, (chants) you ugly, you ugly, yo mama says you ugly! And I cast Vicious Mockery.

(laughter)

MATT: He rolled a 14 vs the DC which I think is–

SAM: 19.

MATT: All right, how much total did you do?

SAM: Just a five.

MATT: How much did you do, total?

MARISHA: 32, total.

MATT: Hold on. So as the duergar is currently held aloft in this aquatic sphere, half-charred and burnt with pieces of his friends floating in the water around him, he hears through this kind of warbling sound, “You ugly, you ugly,” and he sees everyone kind of step in the hallway clapping with you, and he kind of looks around at himself, looks at his situation… and eventually just gives up and takes a big old gulp of water and drowns inside the aquatic sphere.

(laughter)

SAM: Yes! I shamed him to death

ASHLEY: Amazing.

MARISHA: (laughs) What a terrible way to die.

MATT: Good news is, you guys royally screwed over six duergar, one of which you shamed him to death.

(laughter)

MATT: You have definitely, however, announced your presence at the chamber.

LIAM: Vax spanks Tiberius on the tail and says, get ready to deity! Going stealth.

MARISHA: I say– I go, get on my back, get on my back, and I piggyback him.

MATT: You transform?

ORION: I do.

MATT: No, Marisha, did you transform?

MARISHA: Well I'm piggybacking him, just now. I'm literally just piggybacking Tiberius waiting.

MATT: Okay, so Tiberius, you leap onto her back.

ORION: Mm-hm, and I cast Alter Self, and I turn to–

LIAM: Scanlan, Vex.

ASHLEY: I'm going to cast the thing on him.

MATT: Okay, so you cast Thaumaturgy on him to give him a vocal emphasis, a roaring, booming voice. Do you stay with him or do you move back with the rest of the group?

MARISHA: Oh, oh, Pike Pike Pike Pike Pike. What kind of animal would this god use? Would you know what kind of animal the duergar would worship? Do you know?

ORION: It's a religion check.

MATT: Religion check.

MARISHA: What kind of animals he might like? You know, check out– you know, animals.

ASHLEY: 14.

MATT: You have no idea. You know the deity exists, you don't know of any sort of animal, beast or creature symbolism that would befit a duergar god.

ASHLEY: I have no idea.

MARISHA: I guess a scorpion, a scorpion sounds good? Scorpion. Giant Scorpion.

MATT: Keyleth's form shifts. As you see a bunch of arachnid-like legs sprawl out the side of her torso, her form condenses into a dark, chitinous shell as two giant claws form out the side of her body, and a giant poison stinger curls up from behind. Tiberius kind of holds on during the transformation–

ASHLEY: I'm going to go back, because if they see me, then they'll know something's fishy.

MATT: All right, the rest of you are here. So. You feel this kind of divine energy cascade around your throat. You can feel your vocal cords themselves are temporarily infused with some sort of divine presence. You've transformed yourself now into the visage of this duergar deity. Standing at probably a good– what height are you going at?

ORION: How tall are the–

MATT: The duergar are about four-and-a-half feet tall.

ORION: So let's make him six feet tall.

MATT: All right, six-foot-tall duergar standing there.

LAURA: The two of us get back by the other twin door, and get ready to bust into that entrance.

SAM: I'm with them. We're the stealth party.

LIAM: I'm in fact nudging Grog away from this door towards the front towards Tiberius. I don't know, they're not that strong.

MATT: What are you doing? Grog says, “Which way, which way do I go?”

LIAM: Vax kicks Grog in the butt and sends him forward. Go help Tiberius!

MATT: “I'm walking back for you.”

LAURA: Grog, don't do that. Not that far. Grog, come back, because if they see him–

ORION: No, stay in the corner, Grog. Wait 'til I say help me, and then come kill everything.

MATT: He looks like he's listening. Mostly.

(laughter)

MARISHA: Back him up. Back him up.

MATT: You hear shifting in the doorway from the front where you guys are. What's the plan? What's doing what?

SAM: Who's going in first?

ORION: Is this going to be the entrance where we're going in?

LAURA: Yeah you bust in and be a god.

MARISHA: Oh, are we busting in?

LAURA: When you give it, we'll go in the other way.

MARISHA: Fuck if I know.

ORION: That's your job. Bust the door open.

MATT: All right, go ahead and make an athletics check.

LIAM: I'm simultaneously checking our door for– no, I already did. It's unlocked, and untrapped. Never mind.

MARISHA: Giant scorpion. Athletics. Plus my dex, I'm assuming?

MATT: No, plus your strength.

MARISHA: Strength, that's pretty cool, though. 22.

MATT: A 22.

MARISHA: I rolled a 19.

MATT: All right, the doors splinter open. The doors are actually broken off the hinges.

ORION: As that happens, I cast Light and I cast Prestidigitation.

SAM: Concentrate. Don't cast too much shit.

ORION: I can't hear what's going on. I hear some annoyances in the background as I cast Prestidigitation to make my voice louder.

LAURA: No, she already did it. It's three times louder than it normally would be.

ORION: Oh, shit.

MARISHA: So just keep focusing on your Light.

MATT: As you guys come bursting in–

LIAM: Holy shit.

LAURA: Yeah, there's a lot of them.

MARISHA: Maybe do some Prestidigitation where you move shit around.

ASHLEY: Oh ho ho. What!

MARISHA: Oh! Hello, everybody.

LIAM and LAURA: (Grog voice) I would like to rage.

LAURA: Oh, no. Basilisks!

LIAM: What?

LAURA: Those thingies!

MARISHA: Oh, that's right, they have those pet basilisks. Remember?

MATT: So the doors burst open and you guys come through. All of the duergar stand there with their weapons at the ready. You can see in the back, on this raised platform, where the cloth stops, there is two thrones, at the top two duergar sitting on the thrones at the ready. You can see two kind of lizard-like creatures in the back on chained leashes. However, all of the duergar that are ready to strike as you burst through, take a step back, looking extremely confused about what's going on.

ORION: (shouts) Silence! All of you, silence!

SAM: We weren't talking.

ORION: Who knows who I am?

MATT: Make a persuasion check.

MARISHA: Get it. Get it. Get it.

LIAM: Yep. Yep yep yep yep. Vax is quietly moving along the back wall.

SAM: Our door is open?

LIAM: It is now.

LAURA: Yeah we're going to try to stealth in and sneak attack them.

ORION: 16.

LAURA: Oh god. Oh god.

MATT: Okay. The duergar in the front take another step back, looking both frightened and awed. The one nearest to you takes his hammer and throws it to the ground, and takes a knee.

ORION: Well, it looks like there's one saved soul at this point in time.

MATT: At which point two of the other ones nearby kind of look at each other and look back at the one who's on the ground. They put their hammers down, and they kneel as well. At which point, in the back, you see the two throned figures stand up. One of which you can barely see in the dim light outside of your Light spell that's currently gleaming above you. This long, almost-touching-the-floor black, braided beard that drags right over this heavy-set plate of jagged black iron metal. A giant sword in his hand. “You're kneeling below this false idol.”

ORION: Silence!

MATT: “This imposter!”

ORION: As I cast– As I say silence, I blow a big plume of fire out of my mouth, and I cast Control Flames.

MATT: So the light (pff).

ORION: I don't cast Control Flames. I just do the Fireball for effect. I don't do Control Flames, because that's a concentration spell.

MATT: All right, so you do Fireball. Where are you casting Fireball? Or just doing it to do it?

ORION: Just (fwoosh).

MATT: Plume of flame. Roll an intimidation check.

TALIESIN: You guys, what are you doing right now?

LIAM: I'm moving along the back wall. I want that illithid.

ORION: 18.

MATT: Okay. Make a stealth check. Who else is going in there with him?

LAURA: I go in and stand at the walls next to the door.

LIAM: 32.

MATT: Okay, your stealth roll?

ASHLEY: I'm so stressed.

MARISHA: I know! I feel like I'm going to have a heart attack.

MATT: So you rolled a–

ORION: 18.

MATT: Okay, you can see this figure– which you are gathering at this point is probably King Murghol– still holding his sword aloft, looks back towards his wife who's sitting in the throne next to him, who is just standing up kind of confused.

ORION: That's right, boy. I am Laduguer! You know, and you know your deeds as of late might upset my rest.

MATT: All of the duergar are now looking over their shoulders back towards the king and watching this transpire between the two of you.

ORION: (shouts) All of you, lay down your arms!

LAURA: 32.

MATT: 32. You're moving in, everyone else staying in the hallway?

ASHLEY: I'm not moving. I'm like this!

MATT: As you guys push in further and further, the group that are kneeling move back in sheer fear and horror. At which point the king takes a step down off of the throne area onto the next platform, weapons still at his side and says, “Men, I've trained you. I've raised you. I've fed you and I've kept you alive.”

ORION: And I don't care for you to finish that sentence! I cast Fireball. Right fucking– Right on him.

SAM: That's an attack right there.

ORION: Of course it is!

MATT: So the blast hits him and a 20-foot radius that will grab everything in that radius. Including you. So go ahead and roll damage. 8d6.

LIAM: It's all right.

MARISHA: 8d6.

LIAM: Heal me, Pike, heal me. Heal me in three minutes, heal me. This is gonna hurt. This is gonna sting.

MARISHA: Oh, god damn. Come on, you got this. You got this, Vax.

SAM: You want it to be a lot, but not too much.

(laughter)

LIAM: A little less than 55.

ORION: Uh, 25.

MATT: 25, okay.

ORION: Oh, I'm sorry, 30.

MATT: Okay, good. So it explodes around them. You see all of them kind of shield themselves from the blast of flame. As it spreads out–

LIAM: Wait, I'm doing the rogue thing that I can't remember the name for.

LAURA and MARISHA: Uncanny Dodge?

LIAM: No, it's something else.

ORION: Quickly. Quickly.

MATT: So while you're looking that up– The duergar brace themselves and they have an innate natural resistance against things magical in nature.

LIAM: Evasion!

MATT: So they all take the brunt of the damage, however, it does not do as much as you hoped to the group. All of them look hurt, but definitely not taken out of the fight. The two lizard creatures you now have a better look at, you do see it's familiar. They have numerous sets of legs, and though the chains hold them at bay, both of them glance up instinctually. I want you, Tiberius, to make two constitution saving throws.

SAM: Traps.

ORION: Yes.

LIAM: DM. Evasion, if I make a success I get half-damage, if I fail I get– If I fail, I get half-damage, if I succeed I get no damage. I think I failed. I got a nine.

MATT: Yeah you take half-damage. So you take the– What was the total damage on your Fireball? So you take 15 points of fire damage. So as you glance about the room now, you look over and both of these lizard creatures kind of look towards you. You kind of look back and forth– there's a slight gleam in their eye. Suddenly you feel your form begin to tighten up, instant. You are considered restrained, which means you are at disadvantage to all your attack rolls and ability checks for right now.

ORION: Hold on, I still have a bonus attack I can do before that happens, correct?

MATT: No, this is as it's happening. Your turn is still happening.

ORION: I got it.

MATT: This is all kind of a fluid moment. Things happen as they happen until initiative is being rolled, which is now. So everyone roll initiative.

MARISHA: Sneaky sneaky.

LAURA: Oh, great.

MATT: All right, so, 25 to 20?

SAM: Natural 20.

MATT: Plus your–

SAM: Nothing.

MATT: Plus nothing for dex. Okay.

SAM: Oh, for dex. Plus nothing.

MATT: Okay, so 25 to 20?

TALIESIN: 23.

LIAM: 21.

MATT: 21, all right, all right.

TALIESIN: Yeah. Sneak attack.

MATT: All righty, 20 to 15?

LAURA: 19.

ORION: 17.

MATT: All right, 15 to ten?

MARISHA: I'm nine.

ASHLEY: Five. Not to brag.

MARISHA: (laughs) Big number five.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: I just noticed your shirt. It's really great.

SAM: Guys, tune in every week for this kind of intense action.

LAURA: Unless we're all dead next week. In which case–

LIAM: – Mama put the coins on my eyes.

MATT: All right, that brings us to top of the round. Percy, you're up.

TALIESIN: I'm going to hold off until– I'm actually going to delay my turn until post-Pike.

ORION: Can I still yell out shit while this is happening? Even though it isn't my turn?

MATT: I mean, you can yell like one thing.

TALIESIN: I'm loud and I've got range, so I'm going to let the room fill, and then I'm going to come in and get some.

ORION: As this is all going down, I'm going to yell, those who want to live, throw down your arms. That's what I do.

MATT: Okay. That brings us back to the top. Vax, you're up.

LIAM: Okay, I use my bonus action to click my boots of haste together. And I tap-dance over to the illithid, and I'm going to use two daggers to stab him in his eyeballs.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: First one hits, it's 18.

MATT: It is a critical because it does not see you and has not acted yet this combat.

LIAM: Yeah it is. So I just take my keen dagger and I shove it in his eyeball. 1d4 is two, plus–

MARISHA: Feel like I'm going to have a heart attack.

TALIESIN: We're going to be fine. It's nothing we can't handle.

MARISHA: Nothing we can't handle.

LIAM: 19, 28, plus 36 is the first dagger into his eyeball.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: Second dagger also hits for a little less, for seven points of fire damage in his other eyeball.

MATT: All right. Gotcha. So the first one actually jams into one of its eyes. It didn't even see you, it recoils back, slapping your hand back out of the way. The other dagger strikes and just gleans off its shoulder. However, it turns around with its other eye and it definitely knows you're there.

LIAM: I'd like to circulate my hands to kind of carve out the eyeball area.

(laughter)

MATT: No, it pushed you off.

LIAM: Yeah, okay, okay, it's all right.

MATT: All right. That brings us to Grog.

SAM: (Grog voice) I would like to rage.

LIAM: (Grog voice) I would like to go to a whore house.

MATT: He goes into a rage. And Grog is going to go ahead and take his axe with the chain on it and throw it toward the first duergar he sees, which is right here. Throws it. All right, that is a– That's going to miss. He rolled a four. Swings past. He's going to make an athletics check to see if he can bring it back. That he succeeds. So he throws the axe. It swings past the duergar, clangs to the ground, uses his chain, he yanks it back, catches it in his hand. His turn is spent, however. Next up is Scanlan.

SAM: I step into the room, lining myself up with those two pig, creature, beast things. In a line. Yeah. Can I also catch the king or no?

MATT: No, it has to be a line. It has to go straight.

SAM: Going for the guys. I don't want to scald you. You're already hurting. I'm going to go straight across the piggies and make them squeal with Lightning.

MATT: All right. At the start of your turn–

SAM: Oh shit, there's a trap.

MATT: No, at the start of your turn you come up and the creature looks over and you guys make eye contact. You weren't averting your gaze. Go ahead and make a constitution save.

LIAM: Saving throw, saving throw. Come on, Scanlan, you lucky motherfucker! Roll high.

SAM: 17, plus what?

MATT: Plus your constitution modifier.

SAM: 19.

MATT: All right, so, as it glances over at you, there's a shine in its eye, and you feel all of a sudden your form, for a second, tense, and you shrug off the effect, untouched by it. Now, go ahead and take your turn.

SAM: I cast Lightning on the two beasts. In a straight line.

MATT: Okay, so you pull back and you unleash a lightning bolt. It goes streaking across the room.

SAM: If I can get the king, I'll try.

MATT: Unfortunately, he's just out of the line array, but it does streak across and blast both of these now visibly basilisks in front of you. You hit automatically. Just go ahead and roll damage.

(laughter)

MARISHA: Oh sweet, sweet dice rolls.

LIAM: Let it rain!

MARISHA: Let it rain d6s from the sky!

SAM: 29.

MATT: 29. One fails its saving throw, one makes it. So 29 damage to one, and 14 to the other.

SAM: And then, for bonus action, I inspire Vax with a little ditty.

MATT: All right.

SAM: (sings) I want to sing a song of inspiration, of inspiration!

(laughter)

MATT: All righty, that's it. That ends Scanlan's turn. King Murghol's turn, now. King Murghol is going to– It sees this blast of lightning streak past now, as it blasts, just barely passing in front of it, hitting both of his pet basilisks. Now seeing that there's, like, a full army between himself and the current intruders, one of which is visibly stiffening, he glances over at this tiny gnome individual, who now gave loose to this bolt of energy. Grabs his blade with both hands and goes running towards you with an angry– but he uses a bonus action, quickly, to pull out a vial, pop a cork, chug it, shatter the glass on the ground. As he does, you can see his arms actually billow and grow extremely strong and thick with muscle.

MARISHA and LAURA: What color was the vial?

MATT: This was purplish in color. He then runs forward. And is going to take his turn, swinging at Scanlan.

SAM: As he does, I sing (sings) Dodge that sexy attack-oh white boy.

(laughter)

SAM: I sing my– what is it called? Counter– Cutting Word– no, yes, what? Cutting Words! And I try to distract him as he's attacking me. What is that, a d8?

MATT: A d8 off of his first attack.

SAM: Five.

MATT: Five. Okay, well, he rolled a 20, which brings it down, oh, a total of 20, which brings it down to 15. What's your armor class?

SAM: 14.

MATT: Oh. Second strike is a 13. Third strike is a 12. Wow, he just can't hit at all this turn. But, however, the one strike he does get on you, the sword comes down, streaks across the front of you, and as you're finishing your last, final note of that song, you take 18 points of slashing damage.

SAM: Okay, okay, okay.

ASHLEY: Where you at?

SAM: I'm fine.

ASHLEY: Where are you at?

SAM: I'm fine. I've got more than him.

MATT: That ends his turn. This brings us back to Vex!

LAURA: That's me! I cast Hunter's Mark! Actually, I just transfer it, because the other one died. I transfer it to the king. And then I cast– First I want to move Trinket over and– oh no, I can only move Trinket. Okay, first I'm gonna cast Conjure Barrage. It's a 60-foot cone. So I want to see how many of them I can get.

MATT: You can, you can get– let's see. That'll get everybody.

LAURA: Can I angle it so I don't hit my buddies?

MATT: You can angle it in a way that will– well, if you wanna get the king in it, you're going to hit these two here. And Grog.

LAURA: All right, I'll hit them.

MATT: Okay, so, you will be able to hit everything in that row. So go for it. How does the effect on that work?

LAURA: I roll 3d8.

MATT: All right, so go ahead and roll 3d8.

LAURA: That was on a corner. Oh good! 17.

MATT: 17, okay. And what's the effect on the spell, like what do they roll against?

LAURA: They roll a dexterity saving throw.

MATT: Dexterity saving throw. King makes his, with a 20. So he takes half-damage for it, or no damage?

LAURA: Half as much, yeah.

MATT: Okay, so what was the total again? It was– What was the total originally? It was– what was the total?

LAURA: The total? Was 17.

MATT: 17. Okay, so that is eight damage to the king.

LAURA: Plus a Hunter's Mark.

MATT: Right, so roll the additional one on that.

LAURA: Four.

MATT: Four, gotcha. All right. The basilisk also does not make its save. What's the DC on this?

LAURA: DC. What do you mean?

MATT: Your spell DC. At the top of your spell page.

LAURA: Yes. It's 14.

MATT: 14.

LAURA: Oh, I did get a– I didn't add my spell attack bonus! Should I have done that?

MATT: No, that's just to hit something with a spell.

LAURA: Okay, cool.

MATT: All right, so basilisk in front makes it, so it takes the eight damage. Okay, the rest of the duergar, they do make their saves, they take half damage. However, with the spray of arrows that comes flying out of the front of your bow, you manage to take out five duergar in one swipe. The others ones remain, damaged but still standing. Also, now dexterity saving throw for you, Tiberius, and Grog.

MARISHA: Natural 20.

ORION: 19.

MATT: Nice. So both you guys take eight damage. Grog fails, Grog takes 17.

LAURA: I'm sorry, Grog.

MATT: “It's all right.” All right, Vex, is that the end of your turn?

LAURA: Oh, I move Trinket in, and I want to– If I can get him to illithid, I want to get Trinket close, like kind of behind the queen. No, no, I want to get him near. That way he can flank.

MATT: Okay, all right. That ends your turn. It is now Lady Kima's turn.

SAM: Ooh, I forgot about her.

MATT: Kima rushes in angrily. She has to make a saving throw. Succeeds against the basilisk, as it glances past. Rushes forward, in combat with both King Murghol and the basilisk. However, as she goes in for King Murghol, screaming, the blade of the greatsword arcing across the air with a divine glowing energy, you see it aiming for the king, but then looks to her side and sees this dangerous lizard creature, recognizing it in a moment, she changes her trajectory and swings next to the lizard with her first strike. That is a– that hits. And that strike does just enough damage. She cleaves that basilisk in two with her first strike. With her first strike, using the inertia, she turns around and strikes at King Murghol. However, King Murghol, seeing her come forward, takes his sword up and manages to parry hers to the side. Both of them lock for a second as he steps into her and kind of glares into her face. “Oh, you're supposed to be downstairs for playtime.” Pushes her off with his blade.

MARISHA: Playtime? I don't– (laughs) I know, all the ladies are like 'ew'.

MATT: That brings us to Queen Ulara's turn. Queen Ulara is now standing over there with Trinket towards her back. As she instinctually does this, she goes ahead and reaches up, places her hand on the front of her robes. You can see this duergar woman with kind of long, reddish hair that she's let flow to the back, to the small of her back. She stands up out of the throne. As she puts her hand on her chest, her form shimmers, much like you saw earlier on Tiberius, in your earlier battle. She moves back to there.

ORION: As she does that, I try to Counterspell it.

MATT: That's a reaction?

ORION: Yep.

MATT: Okay. So let's go ahead and do the contested roll.

ORION: Contested roll.

SAM: That was almost the name of this show. Not as catchy.

ORION: DC equals ten plus the spell's level.

MATT: Okay. So the DC is 12. Go ahead and you roll that.

ORION: DC is 13. It's a third-level spell. Right?

MATT: Blur is second-level.

ORION: Oh, I thought Counter– Okay, I see.

MATT: Yes. So, Counterspell. Go ahead and– Oh– interrupt a creature in process of casting a spell. If the creature is casting a spell– third level or lower, it fails and has no effect. So, yeah, it just counters it entirely. So, the– her form begins to shimmer for a second. All of a sudden, Tiberius, your attempt to go ahead and counter the spell, that burst of energy you're trying to put through the Blur vanishes. She looks back at you.

ORION: What do you think you're doing, lass?

SAM: You still trying to be a god?

ORION: I'm in that form still.

(laughter)

MATT: Yeah. So with her sorcery points expended on that quick cast, she turns around for her main action, puts out her fingers, and you see these blasts of blue energy begin to rocket out from her fingertips, across the room, in what is a Chain Lightning.

LIAM: Shit. He's got the iPhone out.

MATT: So, this'll be towards– actually, this'd be towards you, Vex, Kima, and Scanlan.

LAURA: All right.

LIAM: Did you say Vex or Vax?

MATT: Yeah, Vex and Vax, both of you.

LAURA: Wait, you're all the way over there.

SAM: Yeah, you're all the way over somewhere else, right?

MATT: Over there, yeah. Chain Lightning, man. It's a bitch. All right. All right, so. Vax, go ahead and make a dexterity saving throw.

LIAM: Not good. Seven.

MATT: Seven, all right.

LIAM: Can I use Evasion, or– Uncanny Dodge or Evasion?

SAM: I gave you some dice. I gave you, I gave you some dice.

LIAM: You did give me some dice.

SAM: It's not going to be enough, though.

LIAM: So now I'm at 13, but can I use Evasion or Uncanny Dodge? Evasion is for area effects, Uncanny Dodge is–

MATT: Well, you've already used one for the area effect, the other one reduces the damage by half.

LIAM: All right, Uncanny Dodge.

MATT: Okay, so you're reducing the damage by half?

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: Okay, so instead, you take 18 points of lightning damage. However, both Vex and Scanlan and Kima all have to make dexterity saving throws as well. She makes hers.

SAM: Not great. 14. I have no dexterity.

LAURA: 16.

MATT: 16, okay. So you took, was it 18 lightning damage, I said?

LIAM: Oh, I didn't add any dexterity. I add a nine to what I got, which means I'm at 22.

MATT: Just, you mean, your dexterity modifier? 22? Okay, then you would've taken half damage, make it quarter damage, so you take half of that even. So keep that in mind when you make your dexterity saving throw. So, that would give you total how much damage? So, it was 18 you took, right?

LIAM: Yeah, and we halved it to nine. Five?

MATT: So, 36 damage to Scanlan and to Kima, and to you, Vex. 36 points of lightning damage. That ends her turn. Tiberius, you're up. So you, it's your turn now, as you're now on top of the scorpion still.

ASHLEY: It's okay.

MARISHA: You're on top of me. I'm holding you!

ASHLEY: I got you.

ORION: Cool. This is– there's still on the altar that's raised above– and all that.

TALIESIN: You've got a problem down there, to be fair.

ORION: Where we're at?

TALIESIN: You've got the witch problem to deal with.

MATT: What do you got, Tiberius? Quick, before you miss your turn.

ORION: I shall miss nothing. I'm going to stay right where I'm at.

MATT: All right.

ORION: I'm going to snicker, and I will (laughs) hand out, put out my hand, and give my little ring a rub, and let out a Fireball from it, right where no one else but these buttholes will get hurt.

MATT: All right, so (laughs), I'd say probably a 20-foot radius around would put it about there.

LIAM: (Tiberius voice) What is the Common word for it?

ALL: (Tiberius voice) Butthole.

MATT: So, as you polish off the ring and release it, the bead of red energy streaks across, blasting the floor, the secondary explosion, giant Fireball just bursts into the room, go ahead and roll damage on that.

ORION: Six, I have enough, there's a four, this is terrible, help me count, eight.

MARISHA: Okay, well, we have all these twos. Let's put the twos side by side. That's fun. Uh-huh.

LAURA: Your turns are taking so long!

ORION: 18. 23!

MATT: 23. Okay. The rest of these duergar detonate, blasted away out of play. Just, their bodies go thrown against the walls and the various pillars in the room. There's two pillars over there, they're kind of holding the ceiling up. The rest of them just go thrown about the room. The queen takes a bit of the damage, but seems to shrug off most of it.

ORION: I'm going to spend two sorcerer points. And I'm going to reach out my hand, and I'm going to form an ice knife and– where is the queen, actually?

MATT: Right there.

ORION: Oh, very good. I'm going to throw the ice knife right there.

MATT: Okay. Right there? All right.

ORION: And I cast it at level two.

MATT: All right. So you get to throw at a target, though, right? Or are you just throwing on the ground to do the radial? Okay, so you take– you form the ice knife, you throw it, it streaks across, slams into the stone floor and explodes, sending shards of ice out. Go ahead and roll damage.

ORION: Which is 3d6, because it's at level two now.

MATT: Correct. Saving throw, which it succeeds.

ORION: Much better. 14 points of damage.

MATT: Okay. Both succeed for half damage. So seven points of damage to each. All right, got it, cool. That ends your turn, Tiberius. Clarota, now–

ORION: How do you like them apples?!

MATT: Clarota steps forward– Seeing the other mind flayer there, steps past and decides to go into a contest of wills against it.

MARISHA: Contest of wills, staring contest, staring contest!

MATT: All right, this is intense. All right. Clarota is going to step forward and begin to intensely stare at– you can see the air itself seems to shimmer and push, like a strange bubble shifting between the two of them at this connection point. Mind flayer, now one-eyed and seeping liquid from the side of its face, glares back at him. Fails his saving throw.

MARISHA: That's right, he does.

MATT: This mind flayer suddenly diverts its attention away from Clarota and towards the queen.

(cheering)

SAM: The old Dominate.

ASHLEY: Tight, tight, tight.

(laughter)

MATT: That ends Clarota's turn. All right. The duergar would go if they weren't all blasted to hell. That brings us to Keyleth.

MARISHA: All right. I'm going to go right for the king. You're coming for a ride, Tiberius. I'm gonna make a straight line. I have a 40-foot movement, pretty straight movement.

ORION: All right! Let's get 'em!

LAURA: Oh no, Tiberius fell off.

MATT: There you go.

MARISHA: Okay, I'm in melee, yeah?

MATT: Yes, you are.

MARISHA: All right, I'm gonna do my full three multi-attack.

ORION: I'm maniacally laughing.

MATT: You are going to have a disadvantage on the tail attack, because you have Tiberius on your back and you're trying to make sure you don't hit him with your tail.

MARISHA: Okay.

MATT: So, first two claw strikes.

MARISHA: Okay, first one, probably not gonna hit. 12?

MATT: No, that does not hit.

MARISHA: Second one. 16?

MATT: Does not hit. Clink, clink! Off the armor. Tail strike.

MARISHA: Tail strike. Two. Ten. Nothing.

MATT: Yeah, unfortunately just his thick suit of armor– you're just hitting at him with the giant scorpion claws, but nothing seems to be getting through.

MARISHA: God, you're so heavy, Tiberius, god!

MATT: You hear this clacking scorpion angrily (scorpion sounds).

MARISHA: My balance is wonky.

MATT: Pike, you're up!

ASHLEY: All right, time for some healing. So pull me in there. I'm gonna do a– I'm gonna do a Mass Cure Wounds. At level five gives, which I thinks gives– thinks? Which methinks gives me 4d8? Plus my spell ability modifier. Okay, so–

MARISHA: Get your heal on.

LIAM: (Yoda voice) 4d8 you would give.

ASHLEY: Oh, so, 20. 20 points of healing for whoever would like it.

MATT: For everyone who's in the radius. Everyone but Grog, essentially, gets healed for 20 points. Grog's too far away from you, unfortunately.

SAM: Thank you, my love.

MATT: All right, Percy, you're up.

TALIESIN: All right, I'm going to just get– just step into the doorway to take a look. I'm just stepping one step. And now I'm just going to shoot– can I– I'm just gonna try and– The minute I recognize what a basilisk is, since I've faced them before, I'm going to do my best not to look and take a shot.

MATT: Okay, so go ahead and fire with a disadvantage against the basilisk on the far end of the room.

SAM: Don't you shoot me.

MARISHA: Oh, that was a pretty one.

TALIESIN: I get 16 at my disadvantage.

MATT: 16 at disadvantage? That does hit. Go ahead and roll damage.

TALIESIN: Nice! I'll be taking another shot, too.

MATT: Also, Tiberius, make another constitution saving throw.

TALIESIN: Six points of damage.

MATT: Six points of damage to the basilisk, got it.

TALIESIN: I'm going to take another shot, though. 16 again.

ORION: Ten.

TALIESIN: 16 hits. This time I do 12 points of damage.

MARISHA: 12 points?

TALIESIN: 12 points. And then I'm gonna duck back around the corner again.

MATT: Okay. Cool. As you duck around the corner, you've gotten these strikes in, and as you're trying to– as you finish your blows on the duergar king, Murghol, in front of you, you hear this clanking sound as Tiberius's now fully stone form falls off of the scorpion onto the ground, beside you.

SAM: Oh no! He's stoned!

ASHLEY: You turned to stone?

LAURA: 'Cause of the basilisk.

LIAM: We've dealt with this before.

LAURA: Basilisk blood, we can fix it.

SAM: I think you pee on the body and it cures them.

ASHLEY: Can I– I can't, I have to go–

SAM: Let's try it and find out.

MATT: The basilisk now takes its turn.

LIAM: (stone Tiberius voice) Please, no!

MATT: Steps forward onto the edge. It's going to go ahead and– it's gonna be for Lady Kima. It's going to attempt to make its stare at her. Lady Kima–

ASHLEY: Close your eyes!

LAURA: She's smart, she's closing her eyes.

MATT: Lady Kima, who's currently in this blood frenzy against the king, unfortunately is not paying attention. Off to the side, the basilisk gets a glance out, which she looks at from the corner of her eye, she sees the movement over and has a hard time pushing through the stiffness as the gaze begins to take a clenching effect on her body.

LAURA: Oh no.

COMPUTER-GENERATED VOICE: All set, let's go.

MATT: Yes, thank you. Let's do that. Oh, Waze. Why's my phone on? All right, so, that brings us to the– Oof, okay.

LIAM: (computer voice) I'm sorry, I can't help you with that, Vex'ahlia.

MATT: This mind flayer, who's currently Dominated, steps forward and is going to attempt to make a tentacle grab against the queen. Queen Ulara manages to dodge out of the way, seeing this coming, and just backhands it, while taking a step back. Unfortunately does not cling with the tentacle. That ends its action. Yeah, unfortunately that didn't hit. All right, next, at the top, that brings us to Vax.

LIAM: I'm hasted. I'm gonna try to go stealth again from where I am. So I'm stealth, 17– 30. Okay. I'm going to scuttle along the floor and leap on the back of the basilisk and try to stab it in the eye while looking at the ceiling.

MATT: Well, at the start of your turn, it's within 30 feet of you and you can see it. Are you going to–

LIAM: Not look at it, no, no.

MATT: Okay, so you're taking disadvantage on this attack. So you move behind, you're hidden.

LIAM: 15 for my first attack.

MATT: Your first attack, that will not hit, unfortunately.

LIAM: And second time, 19 for the second attack.

MATT: That does hit, yes.

LIAM: Okay. Feel for the eyes, stab it with keen dagger– Four. 11.

MATT: Okay. As you rush over, you take your first strike at the basilisk, you see it reel back and slap around its tail. You barely just get out of the way, and as you see its head turning around to attempt to glare at you, you instinctively take your offhand dagger and place it directly into the eye socket of the basilisk. It sinks past your fingers and you feel that warm rush of blood and gore against your hand. As you pull back, it just slumps to the ground.

(cheering)

ASHLEY: We'll get you some of that– we'll get you some of that blood. Blood! Basilisk blood!

LIAM: I only moved ten feet. So who's stone right now? Tiberius and– wasn't– aren't two people?

MATT: Lady Kima is mid-effect and Tiberius is solid stone.

LIAM: I've got Haste on– If I've got Haste on, can I get to Kima? 'Cause I've got haste boots.

MATT: I would say, yeah, you could spend the rest of your movement doing that, yeah.

LIAM: Okay, and I use my thumb to slide some of its blood off the blade and drip it onto her eyes.

MATT: Okay. All right. That ends your turn. That brings us to Grog. Grog turns and is going to go ahead and go raging, frenzied, against the queen. And a critical hit.

(cheering)

MARISHA: He crit?

ORION: Yeah.

MATT: The first hit, she's gonna go ahead and use her reaction to do Shield, it's going to up her defense. First attack misses, so two attacks miss now and the last attack is a critical hit, which is nice. So that's a–

MARISHA: No crits for you! Crit happens, whether you're here or not.

MATT: All right, so that's 31 points of damage. Oof, that's a hefty chunk. All right, that ends Grog's turn. That brings us to Scanlan!

SAM: I'm next to the king, right? I'm near the king? Over there.

MATT: Yep. You're right next to him.

SAM: Okay. I just make eye contact with him and I mentally tell him that he really has the urge to try to do a headstand. Lay down his weapon and he really just wants to see if he can do it.

(laughter)

MATT: Okay.

SAM: Suggestion.

MATT: Okay. (laughs) What's your DC?

SAM: 19.

MATT: All right. This is through the hand cone?

SAM: Through the hand cone, through the hand cone.

MATT: Okay. That will be a 20, unfortunately. Makes his saving throw. He glances back towards you with a look of confusion for a second. Looks at his feet and like begins to reach forward and then steels his mind and looks up at you angrily. All right.

SAM: Can I also, as my bonus action– Who's around me? Who needs inspiration? Who needs inspiring? Who's– yeah, oh, shit. I'll give Pike some inspiration, 'cause she's my awesome sweetheart.

ASHLEY: What do I get?

LAURA: You get 1d8.

ASHLEY: Hey, thanks, man.

MATT: Next up is King Murghol, who's furious now. Both of his beasts have been slain and most of his men have been completely torn asunder by multitudes of arrows and fireball spells. He, now growing in physical form, on top of already the musculature he acquired from that potion, is going to make his three attacks against whatever is nearby. That's actually going to be– actually, that's gonna be two strikes against you, Scanlan, since you just now tried to make him stand on his head, and one against Kima.

(laughter)

MATT: That is a 15–

SAM: Hit.

MATT: – a 24–

SAM: (higher voice) Hit.

MATT: – and against Kima is a 20, that also hits. So all three hit.

LIAM: Nobody puts baby in the corner.

(laughter)

MATT: Oof, all right. So the first strike hits you for 21 points of slashing damage.

SAM: Still alive.

MATT: The next one hits you for 23 points of slashing damage.

SAM: No longer alive (laughs).

ASHLEY: You're no longer alive?

LAURA: Are you unconscious?!

MATT: Scanlan falls unconscious on the ground from the two strikes of the king. The third strike back towards Kima, who's currently seizing from the effect of the spell. She's restrained, so he has advantage.

LIAM: But she's got the basilisk blood in her eyes.

MATT: There's a process to undoing a creature into stone. To your knowledge, it does not seem to be having an effect. However, Lady Kima takes 22 points of damage. All righty. That brings us to– Vex, you're up.

LAURA: Oh, that's me. Every time!

LIAM: I'm Vex.

LAURA: No, you're not. Okay, I'm gonna hail, I'm gonna– hail of arr– no, yeah, Hail of Thorns? At level three.

MATT: Okay, at who?

LAURA: At the queen and the illithid. So, I should've transferred my bonus action over to– but I didn't, that's okay. That gives me– I should've done this before, I'm an asshole, I'm sorry.

LIAM: But what about in the game?

LAURA: That gives me 2d10.

MATT: Additional damage to the arrow.

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: So it explodes around, right? All right, so, fire the arrow. So, as your bonus action, you go and you grab one of the arrows out from the back, and as you pull it back you can see a bunch of these little thorns begin to grow and sprout from the actual shaft of the arrow. You release it and as it arcs across–

LAURA: Yes! Natural 20!

(cheering)

MATT: Against the queen. All right, go ahead and roll the damage for the arrow and the damage for the spell. And all that doubles.

LAURA: Oh, awesome.

MARISHA: (sings) All that doubles is gold.

TALIESIN: (sings) Only shooting arrows.

ORION: (sings) In a butthole.

LAURA: Yeah, all of it doubles.

MATT: The bonus at the end doesn't double, just the dice.

LAURA: Oh, so, 36–

MATT: 36 points of damage. Yeah, plus the seven. And then it does– it explodes? In a radius. And it does the dice damage, the 2d10, to–

LAURA: To everything within five feet.

MATT: All right, so the mind flayer and Grog.

LAURA: Oh, right, yeah, I should've hit the mind flayer with that arrow. No, it would've still hit Grog. Okay.

LIAM: Grog is a tank.

LAURA: They have to make a dexterity saving throw.

MATT: All righty. Grog does not make it and the mind flayer does not make it.

LAURA: Yes!

MATT: All right, cool. All right, second arrow you can fire now if you want to.

LAURA: Second arrow. I'm gonna fire from my flaming bow. I've got one shot on that left. At her again.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: And that's a 28.

MATT: That hits.

LAURA: And that's nine plus a ten, where's my ten? There they are. That's plus two. 11.

MATT: All right. You see flames begin to burn up along the side of her robe and she's looking really flustered and frustrated at this point. All right, that brings us to Kima's turn. No. She's made of hardy stuff. Kima currently is fighting this, is going to go ahead and release an entire– all of her attacks against the king Murghol as he's right in front of her. She has disadvantage on that, unfortunately, because she is restrained. She's gonna make two attacks against him using Divine Smite, expending a 3rd-level spell. So that's 3d8 extra damage to each strike. So the first one hits. Both hit. All right. She's going to do it twice. That's gonna be 6d8 additional damage.

MARISHA: Ooh! That's hot.

MATT: Oof. Okay. So, as Kima rears back, her first strike comes down and hits overhead, into King Murghol's armor, and as it does, it hits. The blade only goes about a few inches in, but then all of a sudden the blade heats up white-hot and actually buries itself an additional six inches into his shoulder. He screams out in pain, reaches up and grabs the blade and as he does, his hand actually burns in the process. She pulls the blade out, around and swings it down again, sinking another eight inches into the side of his torso. This time with a giant arc of white divine light into the side. He looks like he's starting to bleed out from the two of the wounds really heavily. The king is looking a little rough. That ends Kima's turn. Kima's going to try and make a saving throw. Kima pulls the blade out, and turns to stone herself.

LAURA: Oh shit. Shit, shit, shit. He's still at like really high health, too. The king.

SAM: What, he is?

MATT: The king is looking a little rough.

SAM: You never know. He might just start doing a headstand.

(laughter)

MATT: The queen's turn.

LAURA: Oh no.

MATT: The queen looks over at Grog in front of her, kinda frustratedly, uses a bulk of sorcery points, puts her hand up towards him as he's pulling his axe back angrily. He fails his save. And he puts his axe back down and looks towards the rest of the group.

MARISHA: Oh no! Not again!

MATT: Eye color glazed over.

SAM: He's so easily influenced.

LAURA: No, he's under her control.

MATT: So that was her sorcery points, her quick action. She then says, “We're not gonna die this day alone and I won't die. My love, I'm sorry, but there's much more work to be done.” And she raises her hand up and you see this buildup of green arcane energy at her hand. She turns it towards the rest of the group, faces it up towards the ceiling and releases this pulse of arcane, green, ill-looking energy that blasts into the stone ceiling. As it does, the stone itself disintegrates in a large chunk, and a glowing mass of seeping, hot, molten magma begins to pour into the room.

MARISHA: Oh shit!

ORION: Where's it coming from?

MATT: It's now coming from right here.

LAURA: Oh my god.

LIAM: (sings) TPK. TPK.

MATT: So now, magma is pouring onto the throne room from above. The giant fall that is on top of the fortress is now peering into the room.

SAM: (high-pitched) Someone grab me and leave.

MATT: That brings us to Tiberius, who is stone. Clarota currently looks around and–

ORION: Hold on. Am I conscious in stone form?

MATT: No. You are a slate. You are a blue screen. You are Grog after the intellect devourer.

ASHLEY: Oh god, this is bad.

MATT: Okay. (laughs)

SAM: Pike, it's all on you, dude.

MARISHA: Do you have water?

ASHLEY: I can create it.

MATT: Clarota steps back and grabs Lady Kima and begins dragging her back through the doorway.

LAURA: Oh god, we've got to get out. That's a retreat.

MATT: Pulling her down towards the stairway. That brings us to Keyleth.

SAM: Keyleth. Keyleth. Get us out of here.

MARISHA: Okay, okay, okay. I come out of the form. Yes, thank you.

MATT: It's a free action.

ORION: Isn't there a dead basilisk right in front of us right now?

MATT: There is a body of a dead basilisk on the ground, yes.

MARISHA: I'm going to take Wind Wall. I'm gonna cast Wind Wall and try and wrap it around the lava column and try and contain it within the Wind Wall, cooling it down. Essentially making a tornado-like vortex around the lava.

MATT: Okay. For the purposes of this, I want you to go ahead and make a basic religion check.

MARISHA: Okay.

MATT: Wait no, not religion. For you it'd be nature. Just for the purposes of my thought, I think a nature check would be an interesting way to see how this plays out.

MARISHA: 18.

MATT: 18? Okay. So, as you bring this gust of cold wind, swirling around, the column of magma begins to cool and darken as Trinket is like backing up against the wall and the magma is starting to singe the edge of Trinket's nails. It cools to a dark, black, kind of rockish color. And the magma fall ceases, but you can see parts of it breaking and beginning to break past that shell exterior. So you've slowed it.

MARISHA: This isn't gonna hold for long! Somebody rub some blood on Tiberius, quick, and let's get the hell out of here! I'm just holding this.

MATT: Holding it there? Okay. That brings us to Pike.

ASHLEY: There's so much to do. I don't know if I should heal you, if I should rub blood on you or if I should go try to remove the curse from Grog.

LAURA: See if you can get the curse out of Grog. Because if we've got to retreat, then–

ASHLEY: Can Remove Curse remove the thing off of him?

MATT: From your knowledge, no, it's an arcane effect, not a curse.

ASHLEY: That's an arcane effect. Okay, so, Grog might be on his own for a little bit. Okay. So can I heal Scanlan and then also rub some basilisk blood on Tiberius?

MATT: From your previous experience, it's not the blood directly. The blood itself has to be distilled into a specific alchemical form to reverse the effect.

ORION: We just drank the blood last time.

MATT: No, it wasn't drinking. After the battle, you guys took the blood, prepared it, and then used it as part of the recovery.

MARISHA: Will someone collect some blood?

MATT: Okay, so you heal Scanlan. How much does he heal?

ORION: The king's almost dead.

MARISHA: Do we want to kill the king? Do we need somebody alive to help us?

ASHLEY: Oh, 19, 19!

MATT: So you're healed 19. You're on the ground, prone, but you're conscious now.

SAM: Hi!

MATT: You look up at Pike and smile and you look over and see this large column of magma that's now cracking through stone and pouring into the throne room again.

ASHLEY: Is there anything else we can do? Is there anything else I can do at this moment?

MATT: No, this has been a heal, this has been– no, okay, you can move, that's about it.

ASHLEY: I can move? Can I take anyone with me while I move?

MATT: I will say you can drag him. You'll be at half speed.

ASHLEY: Can I try to drag Tiberius away from the magma?

MATT: You can try. Make a strength check.

SAM: You're two feet tall. He's a dragon.

MATT: Let's say athletics, do athletics.

ASHLEY: Athletics? 19.

MATT: Okay. So, you grab onto Tiberius, you rush over after healing him, grab and start dragging him towards the entrance. At half-speed you manage to get him three squares, that's as far as you got. As you're pulling back, the king, as a reaction, gets one strike on you with his sword. That's gonna be a 19.

ASHLEY: Get outta here.

(laughter)

MATT: Your AC is 20?

ASHLEY: It's 20.

MATT: So the blade hits you–

ASHLEY: I just flip him off.

(laughter)

MATT: The blade comes down towards you, but with a flash of divine energy in your shoulder armor, it just gets deflected off the side and you glare at him out of the side of your face. And continue to drag Tiberius out of the room.

LIAM: Now go home and get your shine box.

(laughter)

MATT: All right. Percy, you're up.

TALIESIN: All right. I'm going to step into the room, to give some cover. Right about, probably just slightly on the other end of this.

MATT: Where, over here?

TALIESIN: No, like, next to Keyleth, like near Keyleth.

MATT: Oh, you're gonna have to go around here, then. This is a really harrowing place.

TALIESIN: Okay, the first thing I'm going to do, is I'm going to– I've got my ice shot loaded. I'm going to take a shot at the break in the ceiling and I'm gonna try and ice it over.

MATT: Okay, all right. So as you pull over, you go ahead and aim up with your ice shot ready. Go ahead and fire.

TALIESIN: That's 20.

MATT: 20 definitively hits. It's not hard to do. Go ahead and roll damage and that will signify how long and how much it will stop. So just the ice damage. Not the actual bullet, it won't do anything. So just–

TALIESIN: Oh. So just the ice damage

MATT: Just the ice damage.

TALIESIN: Two.

MATT: Two. Okay. So as you blast up, you can see, as the magma's beginning to pour down again, you blast it and it immediately– a spot cools into a rock and begins to slip again. You've maybe given yourself a couple more seconds. That may be what you need, you don't know. But that's all you got on that one.

TALIESIN: Okay, my next shot, I'm just gonna turn to the king and just shoot.

MATT: Okay, go for it.

TALIESIN: I'm also gonna spend a point for additional damage. And I'm also taking Sharpshooter for additional damage.

MATT: Okay.

TALIESIN: That's 16.

MATT: 16 versus armor class will not hit, unfortunately.

TALIESIN: Oh! Wait, okay, no, I just, I don't get the– oh god, it's not Pathfinder, gah!

MATT: Yeah.

TALIESIN: Okay, that's fine. I'm gonna spend my bonus action to take another shot.

MATT: Okay, so you're using your Action Surge?

TALIESIN: Yeah.

MATT: Okay. So Action Surge. You now have two more attacks. Go for it.

TALIESIN: 23, eff you.

MATT: That hits.

(laughter)

TALIESIN: That's nine points of damage.

MATT: Nine points of damage, got it.

TALIESIN: Taking another shot.

MATT: All right.

TALIESIN: This shot's fire, fire bonus damage. And I'm also gonna spend another grit point to maybe do a little more damage. 28 to hit.

MATT: That hits. Go ahead and roll damage. With the extra grit point you do two dice, right?

TALIESIN: Yeah. I get a bonus die, I just have to find one. Oh, that'll do. That's 17 points of damage plus one point of fire damage.

MATT: Nice. Okay, so, the next– the first shot fires, just ricochets off his armor and streaks across the room. You get his attention, though, and he looks back at you with this kind of wild look in his eyes, the muscles tensing. You can see the armor actually bending and twisting against his physical form underneath. However, the next shot blasts off side of his jaw, there's actually a giant gap now in his flesh as he looks back at you and you can see his teeth. And as he grits down towards you, now definitely intent on getting vengeance on that, the second shot (impact sound) takes off a chunk of his head. You can see the skull exposed on where you've now taken a piece of flesh off the top of his scalp. He's looking pretty rough.

TALIESIN: Let's move it, people. And I'm gonna take like a step back towards the door. Just with what's remaining of my movement.

MATT: Okay. You can get back to there. All right. That brings us to–

TALIESIN: Oh, I killed him, didn't I? No, he's not dead, damn it.

MATT: He's not dead yet. Not dead yet.

TALIESIN: I know, that would've been so cool.

MATT: All right. The mind flayer, who is no longer dominated as Clarota took his attention off of that for the time being, looks around at everyone, sees the circumstance, the magma flowing down, and just grabs his chest and you can see his form blink out and vanish.

ORION: (groans) He peaced out.

MATT: That brings us to the top. Vax. At this round, by the way, is broken and has begun to spread, the magma has now filled this much of the room. And it's quickening.

LIAM: My boots of haste are on, so I run– I just dart right around Grog, around that column, up to the queen, while pulling out my keen dagger, I speak my mother's name, kiss the blade and shove it in, right into her collarbone.

MATT: All right, go ahead and roll for the attack.

LIAM: So that's a two, but I'm gonna use Luck. I get ad– 20.

MATT: 20 does hit.

LIAM: Because of it, and because Grog's there, this–

MATT: Grog is not an ally, currently. You do not get Sneak Attack.

LIAM: Don't get Sneak Attack, all right. Three, ten, then. That's the first attack. And the second one also hits, that's a 29.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: Is ten.

MATT: Ten, nice. So the first blade plunges into her clavicle, she maneuvers out of the way to the point where it misses any vital points, but still sinks in. She looks at you angrily and you can see her dull white, ashy, duergar eyes flash with an intense arcane rage. As you pull the blade out, her eyes dart around with some sort of a plan, a thought process going through her head, as the other blade sinks into the side of her torso she spits out blood that actually spatters across your face. She pushes the blade out and you see her preparing herself for something. That ends your turn. Grog currently moves forward towards you.

LIAM: (Grog voice) Wrong direction!

MATT: That is a 25 versus armor class.

LIAM: Yeah, but Uncanny Dodge!

MATT: How many times can you– you've already used that. It's once per encounter. Once per encounter you can use that. Next one is a 21 versus armor class?

LIAM: Once a round.

MATT: Once a round you can do it? Okay, well never mind. So take half on that first attack. All right, so. First strike comes at you with a– oof, that'll be 19 points of damage. Reduced to nine.

LIAM: Yeah, okay.

MATT: Second strike hits you for a total of 15 points of damage. So 24 total.

MARISHA: Could be worse.

MATT: And that's Grog's go. That brings us to Scanlan.

LIAM: That really hurts, Grog.

SAM: With my knowledge of the arcane arts, do I have any knowledge that using my Dispel Magic spell would work on Grog? Or do I just have to try it?

MATT: It's a possibility. You know the spell that's been cast on him– you use it. There is a chance, but it has to be a contested roll.

LIAM: You could roll a 20.

MARISHA: You could roll a 20.

SAM: Does it take my move to just stand up?

MATT: Yes, it does, unfortunately. So it's your call.

SAM: But I don't have to be standing to cast a spell–

MATT: No, but I would say it's going to be difficult, it's going to give–

SAM: All right, I'll stand up.

MATT: All right. You get back up. What are you doing?

SAM: And I will– Jesus, is it better for me to get out of there or get the king?

LAURA: Yeah, get the king. You may be able to kill him. He's on his last legs, probably.

MATT: He's looking pretty rough.

SAM: Yeah, but Keyleth is right behind him.

LIAM: Do it. Stab him.

LAURA: You can attack him with your sword.

SAM: I am a tiny, tiny boy. I can only do–

LAURA: Do it anyway. He's at his last legs. It would be epic, Scanlan.

MATT: What do you got? Go ahead, quick. Magma's pouring through.

SAM: Okay, I swing my Singing Dawnblade at him. (laughs) I have a dawn blade. It's just so lame though! It's so weak!

MATT: Okay, so. Go ahead and roll for an attack, d20.

SAM: A natural 20.

(cheering)

MARISHA: We said he could roll a 20! We called it! Who called it? We called it.

MATT: So, roll the dice.

SAM: So that's eight.

MATT: You rolled an eight. Times two, that's 16, plus whatever the bonus damage is for the sword.

SAM: Plus seven. Plus the dawn blade gets another bonus attack at disadvantage.

MATT: It does. So, you strike with a critical hit, doing– let's see, that's eight, 16, plus seven, 23 points of damage, go ahead and roll for a second attack.

SAM: I've never hit anyone with a sword before! Five.

ASHLEY: Can I give him a War God's Blessing and give him a plus ten?

MATT: You can.

ASHLEY: All right, plus ten, so fifteen.

MATT: So what's your total? You rolled a five, plus–

SAM: Five plus– ten– I don't know, what am I adding? I've never used a sword before!

MATT: Add your proficiency modifier, which is four, plus your strength modifier, so that's five to that, which is ten, makes it 20, which hits! Roll damage on the attack.

(cheering)

MARISHA: Kill him, kill him!

SAM: Six!

MATT: Six points of damage. All right, six on that plus your strength, which is one. Seven. Plus the dawn blade, which is– that's eight. So that's eight damage on top of the 23. How do you want to do this?

(cheering)

SAM: I– as I draw back the blade, I say, oh! You should've stood on your head! And I lop it off.

MATT: So. As you say that, you– the blade vibrates to the sound of your voice, like the echoing of a song of Scanlan behind yours in almost a chorus out of nowhere. The blade streaks through the air, coming down, slitting across the back of his Achilles' tendon. He instinctually falls to one knee, which is kind of the height level for you. As you do, you bring the blade around with a flourish and take Murghol's head off his shoulders. It spins, tumbles to the ground, and rolls across the floor into the magma. Blackened beard curling back as the rest of his face is melted away by the lava, which is now pouring pretty heavily into this room.

SAM: (sings) Scanlan make you feel good!

MATT: All right. So that's your action. And your movement. And your bonus action. No, you did your bonus action to do the extra attack.

SAM: Oh! Great, great. I don't know how to use swords!

MATT: All right, so. That's the end of your turn. Wow! You used a sword! And got a kill! On a boss!

SAM: Yay!

ASHLEY: Good job, Scanlan!

MATT: All right, King Murghol's turn would be now, but he's on the ground. Vex?

LAURA: I call Trinket back. Get him away from that lava. I run past, 'cause I can't– can I see? Do I have an angle or is it being blocked by molten tornado?

MATT: You– it's completely blocked right now.

LAURA: Can I run across behind it?

MATT: Through here?

LAURA: Yeah. Is that magmous right now?

MATT: Yeah, it is. It's still pouring! She slowed it down, but it's still breaking through and pouring out slower. It would be even bigger if they hadn't slowed it.

LAURA: Okay, then well, maybe I won't run in that direction. I run in the other direction and down– yeah. So I can see.

MATT: Go for it. Roll for an attack.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: First attack.

LAURA: First attack is (sings) 20. No. 19.

MATT: Hits.

LAURA: Yes! Okay. 14.

MATT: 14 points of damage.

LAURA: Second attack is– Second attack is (sings) 21!

MATT: Hits. Roll damage on that.

LAURA: What's that? 12?

MATT: 12 to hit?

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: Or 12 damage?

LAURA: 12 damage.

MATT: All right, 12 damage.

LAURA: Oh, um. Hunter's Mark. Damn it.

Bonus action!

MATT: Yep. All right, so both arrows (impact sounds). One clips her in the leg, and the other embeds itself in her abdomen. You see she grabs for it. She's looking really rough. Next is Kima. Kima's stone. It's now the queen's turn. She looks over at you who's stabbed her, the arrows in her abdomen, and she looks up at Grog and says, (sighs) “We've got business elsewhere.” And she reaches out and touches Grog. Both of them blink out, Dimension Door.

SAM: We've lost Grog again!

MATT: A very familiar purplish color as you've seen you cast it, they Dimension Door out of the entire vicinity.

SAM: Son of a–

MARISHA: This is the second time we've lost Grog.

MATT: At which point, the stone rocks crack on the column and the magma now goes into full pour.

LAURA: We've got to get out!

MATT: You guys have to get out of that tunnel. What do you do now, what's the process?

ASHLEY: We run!

SAM: Wait, we gotta get our stone friends out.

MATT: So, this is going into a skill challenge now.

LAURA: Yeah, we all run out that–

SAM: No, we don't all run out, they're stone, we have to drag them out, yeah.

LIAM: Who all's stone, it's Tiberius and Kima? Okay.

MARISHA: Can we– where's the magic carpet? Throw their asses on the magic carpet!

LAURA: Grog has the magic carpet. Grog had everything.

SAM: Wait, Feather Fall, do you have Feather Fall?

ASHLEY: Before, before we leave, can I take some of the basilisk's blood and put it in a vial?

MATT: Okay, this will be the first skill challenge. Go ahead and make a dexterity check.

ASHLEY: Dexterity check?

MARISHA: Oh, can we get the magic carpet now?

MATT: No, the magic carpet is in the bag of holding. That thing is huge. You carry that with you, you would be at disadvantage for everything you've been doing.

ORION: Oh, I see.

ASHLEY: 18!

MATT: 18, okay, so. I mean, you go over to it, and you manage to gather up into your wine skin a little bit of basilisk's blood, best you can. The magma pulls close to you and you manage to just take six points of fire damage from just the general heat of the magma now pouring into the room. It's spilling out and now just continuing to fill the rest of this chamber.

LIAM: I shout to Percy, come, Tiberius, now!

TALIESIN: We pick him up.

MATT: Both of you guys make an athletics check.

SAM: Oh, it's not a strength check?

MATT: For this, this is just an athletics to pull them all off.

LIAM: 19.

TALIESIN: 17.

MATT: Okay. You guys grab and pull Tiberius out of the room. It takes the two of you to heft him over. You manage to pull him out of the way, that works out well. Down the stairway, all right. We don't need the video for this, we're just going to do this visually. So, you guys manage to bring Tiberius down the stairway. What are you doing, Scanlan?

SAM: I'm unfurling my Bull's Strength scroll and reading it so I get a plus five to strength? Is that a thing?

MATT: All right, so that's Enhance Ability. So you go ahead and give yourself Enhance Ability. Your strength is now– you have advantage on all of your strength checks.

SAM: Okay, and I start to help, who was pushing Kima? I'm gonna help push Kima out.

LAURA: Oh wait, no! Wait, didn't Clarota take Kima?

MATT: No, Clarota pulled Kima out of the room.

LAURA: Oh, so we're all fucking fine, let's just get out.

MATT: So you guys are fine.

MARISHA: I go ahead and on our way out I cast Create Water, and I kinda just use my air ability and make a mist to try and like mist the lava that's coming towards us.

MATT: Okay. You do, but the magma's so intense and this has filled so much of the room now that you get a localized area. The rest of it just kinda flows around and continues to fill the space. All right, so. All of you guys make a dexterity check to try to get down quickly. Go for it.

ASHLEY: Can I make another one?

MATT: Yes, everyone makes one.

TALIESIN: Natural 20.

LIAM: Natural 20.

ORION: (hoarsely) I rolled a 19!

MARISHA: 20.

SAM: (sings) Seven!

ASHLEY: Four!

LAURA: Do I get to roll twice 'cause of terrain?

MATT: Because of– yes you do.

SAM: Do I get my Enhance Ability?

MATT: Not for this one.

ORION: I would like to note that I am frozen like this.

MATT: Okay, Tiberius is.

LAURA: 29.

MATT: Okay, gotcha. So, Pike and Scanlan, both of you guys are, unfortunately 'cause you're smaller and your legs are moving, you guys rush down the stairway and curl around. As the rest of you make your way to the door, which is currently closed, you are all kinda gathered at the exterior of that hidden doorway. It's currently dark and held shut on where you guys entered. However, you two, the magma's now reached the stairway. It's beginning to pour down off the top, and it manages to catch the two of you. You guys each take five points of heat damage from the magma's proximity.

LIAM: To the two ladies?

MATT: No, Pike and Scanlan. You guys make it to the bottom floor. The doorway is currently closed for the secret exit of the fortress.

LIAM: Vax drops Tiberius' stone ass to the ground and starts feeling to get the mechanism of the door open.

SAM: Are we at the foot of the stairs yet, me and Pike?

MATT: You guys just make it to the foot of the stairs. You guys are now–

MARISHA: It's a big stone door?

MATT: Yeah, it's the one you guys, the one you guys– it opens up, outward.

MARISHA: I just cast Stone Shape and make a hole.

MATT: Okay, as you're feeling around for the mechanism, Keyleth steps forward and basically the stone turns into almost a clay, and she just pulls it apart.

MARISHA: Sorry, Vax. I didn't mean to, like, overstep there.

MATT: A giant glob of magma pours down and splashes down onto the ground, hitting everyone in the vicinity. Everyone down here takes 12 points of heat damage.

LIAM: Ah, it's hot, it's hot, it's hot!

LAURA: Hot hot hot hot hot.

LIAM: All right, I'm picking up Tiberius' stone butt and continuing–

MATT: Okay, you guys push through the open hole that Keyleth pushed in, sweat dripping down your faces as the heat proximity to you is nigh-intolerable. You make your way out of the gate and now you have that giant magma flow.

LAURA: Oh, right! Is the thing not– wasn't there–

MATT: No no– as you guys go and step out, the doorway that opened up, previously? Is what parted the magma flow. You pulled it open, so now it's just a wall of magma in front of you.

LAURA: She also had created a wall barrier.

MARISHA: I did create a wall over top.

MATT: You did. It's not there anymore.

MARISHA: It was permanent!

MATT: It was permanent, but a perpetual flow of magma on it for a period of a few hours will eventually eat through a stone wall.

LAURA: Can you cast it again?

MARISHA: I can. Yeah. Do it again. Bam.

MATT: Okay. It's probably the last of that. You create a stone wall that juts out, once again blocking off the magma flow. You guys all step out of the room just as the main force of magma begins to fill the room behind you. Everyone make one more dexterity check to get out in time, as it's a small space and you're pushing out.

SAM: Natural 20.

ORION: 16.

MATT: You made nothing.

MARISHA: “You made nothing.” Seven.

TALIESIN: Ten.

ASHLEY: Two.

LAURA: Oh no. 29.

LIAM: 12.

MATT: Okay. Everyone under 15: you, you, Percy, I believe, and Keyleth. The magma now, as you're helping getting your friends out, you're pushing out, you push Vex out– Vex darts out, Scanlan manages to get out. As you guys are pulling Tiberius through, the hefty force of magma comes funneling down into the room and splashes across the floor.

TALIESIN: Oh, that's a lot of dice.

MATT: That is 18 points of heat damage.

LIAM: Vax is unconscious.

MARISHA: 18 points?

MATT: As you're pushing through, Vax, you fall unconscious as the magma is currently lapping at the back of your leg. The rest of you begin pushing out as you begin to realize that your half-elf friend is currently melting in a pool of magma.

ASHLEY: Can I grab him? Can I grab him out?

MATT: Go ahead and make a strength check. This is strength at this point, this is pure adrenaline pushing through.

ASHLEY: 12!

MATT: 12. You manage to start pulling him up through the hole that Keyleth made.

TALIESIN: I'm going to assist, I'm pulling out– I'm doing another ice shot to try and cool off the magma around him.

LAURA: I send Trinket up, to like, pull him.

MATT: Before you get to that point, as you're readying for it, 'cause it's a small space– as you're pulling it, giant bear claws come over and latch onto the back of Vax's armor. The grizzly bear begins to tense, pulling back. Makes a strength check. That'll do it. Both of you manage to pull you out. You take an additional bit of heat damage. You are now at two failed saving throws. Two failed death saving throws.

LIAM: I am a centimeter away from real death.

MATT: As he pulls it out, you can see most of his foot is melted. And his right leg.

SAM: Aw, that's his best leg.

TALIESIN: I pull a level two healing potion, just get it in his mouth.

MATT: Okay, you pull it out. At this point, the magma's beginning to fill up the room, by the way.

MARISHA: Okay, wait wait wait, can I take my stone wall and like, close it off? We're all out, right?

MATT: You're outside of it. How long does Stone Shape last?

MARISHA: Stone Shape?

MATT: What you used on the wall.

MARISHA: I'm just– I'm just taking it away.

MATT: Closing the wall?

MARISHA: I'm closing it. I can do it again, I still have two more spell slots.

MATT: Okay, how many spells do you have at that level?

MARISHA: Three.

MATT: Three. So you spent–

MARISHA: One, so far.

MATT: One going out, coming– no, wait, it's the same– you haven't had a chance to do a full night's rest.

MARISHA: I know. I was an animal all week– all last game. I didn't use any last game.

MATT: That's true, so you used the stone form, used Stone Wall.

MARISHA: I used one Stone Wall last week and I have two level five spells now.

MATT: That's true, that's true, you do, that's good. All right, I just wanted to make sure. Okay, so as you do that, you send up another Stone Wall. It blocks off the magma just as it begins to pour over and spill out into this vicinity. It'll last a short time, but it'll last enough for what you guys need. You guys drag–

ASHLEY: Can I heal him?

MATT: You can attempt to, yeah, go for it.

LAURA: Anticipation.

MARISHA: I know. C'mon, Pike!

ASHLEY: 24.

MATT: All right. Heals you.

LAURA: Oh my god.

MATT: Comes to consciousness. You guys are about ten feet away from the base of the stronghold. Your foot heals up, but it's still burned.

LAURA: Ew, get that away from me.

MATT: For the time being, until you can take some serious physical rest, your movement is reduced by five. And your stealth rolls are currently at disadvantage.

ASHLEY: Can that ever be healed?

MATT: Over time with some rest it can be, but right now– like, you're healed up, but that foot is scarred. It probably spent a good six seconds completely submerged in molten lava.

LIAM: Are you telling me I'll never compete in the roller derby again?

(laughter)

MATT: Quite possibly. You all are just on the outskirts of the stronghold. You can see now elements of the windows of the top floor are beginning to glow with internal light, as the entire stronghold is currently filling up entirely with molten rock.

SAM: Oh, I left my keys in there!

(laughter)

MATT: You're all resting for a moment, off to the side. Grog is missing. And you all take a moment to realize that somehow you all managed to survive this, mostly.

MARISHA: Sort of.

MATT: However, you didn't find the vault, didn't find Kima's stuff, and a number of escaped individuals from this are out and at large. We'll end today's game on that note.

LIAM: Percy, I need Bad News to be my other foot now.

MARISHA: Yeah, you should have– you need, like, a sweet pimp swagger now.

MATT: So that went a little long, guys. Thank you for your– for hanging out, but that was an intense session. Some climactic moments there.

LIAM: Are you sure you guys don't want to send in a bulette, right now?

MARISHA: Yeah, or maybe, like, you know, a black ooze. You wanna do that?

SAM: Wow, guys.

ZAC: That was fucking intense.

MATT: That was crazy!

ZAC: Guys. Riveting. And exhausting. Are you guys tired?

ALL: Yes.

ZAC: No dancing tonight, guys, get over it.

ASHLEY: Sorry it went late.

LAURA: That went so long, I'm sorry guys.

ZAC: No, they are happy that you went late. They want you to stay forever.

MATT: That was nuts.

ZAC: So I wanted to make a couple announcements of people that helped out tonight. Not just donators, oh so– I'm gonna read off a couple of people who helped out first and then we're gonna start off reading off people who donated to the charity. If you want us to read off who you are and your message to the Critical Role crew, you still have time to donate, 'cause I'll start at the bottom and work my way up. So if the mods could post the link to, you know, the command for Critical Role and you guys'll see there's a link there to donate. Donate to 826LA. Every little bit helps these guys a lot and it would be really helpful to the stream and the show. These guys have been working really hard and Matt puts in a ton of time and to show your support, go donate to the charity and we'll get to your messages. Okay, so first off, I'm gonna thank the_Duganator8–

MARISHA: Yes! Was it the Duganator's birthday?

ZAC: Yes!

ALL: Happy birthday, Duganator!

MARISHA: (sings) Happy happy birthday, from all of us to you. We wish it was our birthdays, so… we're partying. Yay, woohoo!

ZAC: Way to not use the copywritten one.

MARISHA: (laughs) Yeah, way to not use the copywritten one, yeah.

ZAC: Arislan and Alduin and JakeBoudreaux and Negihama and Duganator8 were all the ones that pitched in to buy dinner for you guys.

MARISHA: Thank you guys, we love it, cupcakes! Happy birthday.

ZAC: And then as a quick update for what's happening tomorrow, we have three performances tomorrow night. So tomorrow is Gather Your Party and it's kinda like our bring your friends, have a good time with board games and music and everything. So Indiecade's coming by tomorrow night to show off some new board games. And then we have two bands playing, Sonja Midtune and Bearwolf. And then we have the musical improv group that was here during the charity drive is coming back to do a performance, Robot Teammates and The Accidental Party, and that's tomorrow night, it'll be a lot of fun. So I'm just gonna pull up these donations and messages, if you wanted to see and start going through 'em. And we'll probably have more as we get to the top. So starting at Fifthdreamtoday said, “I love Critical Role, kudos for giving to a great cause.”

MATT: Oh thank you, Fifthdreamertoday.

ZAC: Ravendreamer: “Cheers and godspeed to the bold members of Critical Role for supporting reading in children.”

MATT: Thank you, Ravendreamer.

ZAC: Voractin24: “A combined donation for Critical Role and for myself and my role group.” Oh. “from AngelMitsu.”

MATT: AngelMitsu and Voractin24, thank you.

MARISHA: Thank you, guys.

ZAC: It's hard to read some of these messages.

MATT: That's all good.

ZAC: MageInATower– Starbuck86x. Cargoth912. Eridinsk– Eridinsk. I'll pull that one up. “Thanks for all that you've done with the show, it's amazing, definitely my favorite show, happy to support the charity for you guys.”

MATT: Aww. Thank you, Eridinsk, that's awesome.

ZAC: Alduin. “A small thank you for what you're doing, it's awesome. Keep it up.” RGcanok #CriticalRole.

MATT: RGcanok, thank you, buddy.

ZAC: TonyLoneFight, donate for 826LA.

MATT: Thank you, TonyLoneFight!

ZAC: CrazyNexy

MATT and MARISHA: CrazyNexy.

MARISHA: You're crazy.

ZAC: FurryHunter85, “hope it helps a little.”

MARISHA: It does. It helps a lot.

ZAC: Almostheaven, “This is becoming a weekly thing, much love, the #CriticalRole crew.” Becoming a weekly thing for us too.

MARISHA: Almostheaven? More like totally heaven. Always heaven.

ZAC: Zanderinvictus: “Worthy cause and worthy people to make my Thursday so enjoyable ”#lessthan3”

MATT: Aww thank you, Zanderinvictus.

ZAC: Nixdeathsticks: “I don't encourage violence.”

(laughter)

ZAC: Warmcustard: “I was totally gripped tonight.”

MARISHA: Thanks Warmcustard!

(laughter)

ZAC: Samwheeler: “Incredible stream tonight, thanks so much.”

MATT: Thank you, Samwheeler. You guys are awesome!

ZAC: Sure enough, there's, oh my gosh.

MARISHA: I know I'm getting more now, muzzbuzz.

ZAC: Poltergeist123.

MATT: Thank you Poltergeist.

MARISHA: That's a good movie!

ZAC: Ironwolf: “Great stuff, guys.”

MATT: Ironwolf! Strong name!

ZAC: Dumoco: “Thank you for a wonderful time, thank you all for a wonderful time.”

MATT: Thank you for watching, Dumoco!

ZAC: Tone17: “Another donation to a good cause to push karma in the party's favor.”

MARISHA: We like the karma!

TALIESIN: More 20s!

ZAC: Frisbee: “Thank you for letting us share your adventures. It means a lot to us too.”

MARISHA: Thanks Frisbee!

ZAC: 13Modem, “Thanks Critical Role team.” thisisbonertown: “The least I can do for entertaining all of us.”

MATT: Yeah bonertown!

(laughter)

MARISHA: You are the least we can do to entertain ourselves.

ZAC: LightningGemini: “I love Critical Role, you guys are amazing.”

MATT: Thank you LightningGemini.

ZAC: Wheelyfactoid: “Love you guys, can't wait to finish my knife for Liam and bear for Laura.”

MARISHA: Wait, what?!

ZAC: Sounds like they're making a knife for Liam and bear for Laura.

TALIESIN: How do you make a– nope.

LIAM: I encourage violence.

(laughter)

LAURA: I encourage massages.

ZAC: Sickwizard: “Every kid should know how to read, I love Critical Role, Matt, feel free to TPK.”

LAURA: No!

MATT: I don't try to!

ZAC: You know– oops, sorry, from Zenjurken: “You know it's good when you're worried for the characters on screen, and good luck.” Scaviensuretoriot. Popeblasterfighter: “I love you guys so much and you guys make me laugh every time.” Danmanmountain: “Thanks Critical Rollers. Great show tonight, happy to give back #23fu.”

MATT: Ha! I saw that in the chatroom

ORION: 23fu meet Bonertown.

ZAC: Headance. Tiberiusthelad. FicklePickletickler: “#Zacsbonerjams”

(laughter)

MARISHA: FicklePicketickler, that's great.

MATT: Thanks FicklePicketickler.

ORION: Also lives in bonertown.

ZAC: And one more, this will be the last one, SilentKagamusha: “Critical Role is why I am now addicted to and starting my first game of D&D.”

(cheering)

ZAC: “Matthew Mercer is why I will DM so I should help out.”

MATT: Good on you, buddy! Storytelling.

ZAC: If anyone donates after and we go offline, I'll make sure these guys get the messages and they're aware that you donated. Thank you all for tuning in. You guys are killer. Killer show.

MARISHA: Thank you guys so much! You are all amazing, I love you so much.

ZAC: We're going to go offline and then come back up with the rebroadcast of Thursday and you'll see this playing throughout the night and tomorrow morning, and will be up on the website tomorrow, so thank you. Thank you guys.

MATT: See you next week.

SAM: Bye! 

Pre-Show

MATT: Hello and good evening, everyone. Welcome to tonight's episode of Critical Role, where a bunch of us voice-actors get together and play Dungeons and Dragons– crazy, fun, nerdy times. So we are unfortunately missing Travis Willingham again this evening, because he's a pussy and had to go see Avengers tonight, so feel free to let him know on Twitter. But anyway, we have a really fun, action-packed adventure– as if last week's wasn't tension enough. Let's see how the rest of the group manages to recover from their climactic battle at the top of Emberhold. But in the meantime, let's go ahead and give you an intro and some of the character backgrounds before we come back.

[dramatic music] [character backgrounds]

MATT: Hey guys, welcome back. While we are missing Travis, it's totally fine, Avengers is a fantastic film. It's a wonderful film and hope he doesn't spoil anything for us in his return, but he is missed. Travis, we miss you. We'll have you back next week, hopefully.

ORION: I'm going to spoil the movie for everybody: they win!

TALIESIN AND LAURA: But do they?

MATT: I don't know. It's Joss Whedon (laughs)

ORION: I didn't say who 'they' were.
Part I

MATT: Oh, that's true. All right, so, welcome everyone. For those of you who's this the first time, (laughs) buckle up for some interesting– So we're a bunch of voice actors who play Dungeons & Dragons and this is our campaign we've been running for a while. To give you a little heads-up on the story so far, the party was hired to find an individual named Lady Kima, and she is a halfling paladin. The platinum dragon Bahamut is her deity.

SAM: And we found her!

MATT: You did. I was going to get to that.

(all laugh)

MATT: So they went seeking her in caverns beneath the dwarven city of Kraghammer. After much fighting and surviving, they manage to find their way to a duergar fortress called Emberhold, where they found Lady Kima captive beneath. They released her and then, using her help, assaulted the throne room at the top and managed to slay King Murghol of the duergar. However, in the process, Grog, our intrepid barbarian, was kidnapped by the queen mage before she could be slain, who then also disintegrated a portion of the roof, letting an entire cavalcade of molten rock into the fortress. The party then had to make a heated escape. However, a number of the party members, due to the gaze of the two basilisks that were kept in the throne room as pets, Lady Kima and our Tiberius Stormwind, our dragonborn sorcerer, are currently stone. Dragging them out of the fortress as the magma began to fill the interior, a very deft escape was made, aside from Vax unfortunately getting his foot temporarily submerged in the lava, taking some serious damage to his foot. The party manage to make their way outside of the Emberhold proper, and you've all taken a moment to breathe at this point, realizing that thankfully, for the most part, you've all survived. Aside from the missing party member and a few in a state of flux at the moment. So, picking up there where we left off. You're all breathing heavily. The sincerity of the battle has just come over you. The adrenaline's still pumping through your system.

LAURA: Your foot is melted off.

LIAM: It's kind of there (groans).

MATT: Mostly. There's some… You can see four of the five toes.

LAURA: Oh, that's not bad. It's four out of five.

MATT: About three and a half.

LIAM: Did I lose the big or the small?

MATT: (laughs) This would be the small.

ASHLEY: Oh, you can do without the pinkie.

MARISHA: Your balance is probably a little wonky.

MATT: Yeah, a little bit.

LIAM: Clears that athlete's foot, though. Gone.

MATT: Sure enough.

SAM: Is anyone following us? Can we do a quick check around and just see?

MATT: Make a perception check.

SAM: Perception check? Starting it off with a 19.

MATT: Glancing around, you start hearing various duergar screams from above as the individuals that were still inside the fortress are in the process of trying to get out, or in the process of slowly melting in the molten rock. What you do also notice is that off towards the bottom base of the stronghold, a number of duergar that reside in the buildings that surround the exterior of Emberhold proper are mounting arms and charging up towards the stronghold to give aid to wherever this seeming, loud shouting and screaming is coming from.

LAURA: Can they see us?

MARISHA: Does anyone seem to be paying attention to us?

MATT: No, they're far enough away where you don't think it's an issue, and you're off to the side, for the moment. But you do see probably close to 30 to 40 duergar are currently swarming out the small city, making their way towards Emberhold.

MARISHA: So right now they're focused on the chaos of the temple?

MATT: From what you can see.

SAM: We should get out of here.

LAURA: There was a path further down that led further on into the tunnels. I think we should follow that.

MARISHA: Well, hang on. Grog can't be far, right?

SAM: He could be in another dimension.

MARISHA: No, he can only be a thousand feet away.

SAM: Says who?

MARISHA: They used the spell Dimension Door that Tiberius has.

LAURA: So we hope he used Dimension Door.

SAM: I have a spell that can go to another dimension (chuckles).

MARISHA: Well, I remember the gods on high telling us last week that we recognized the spell that was used.

SAM: By the way, this is the best conversation we've ever had with Tiberius.

(all laugh)

LAURA: Oh, Tiberius.

MARISHA: Aw man, I feel that comes back to bite us in the ass later (nervous laugh) because he is still conscious, right?

MATT: No.

LAURA: He has no idea what's happening.

MATT: He's in darkness. He can't hear. He's not conscious.

SAM: If Grog is close, we still need to get out of the way of these 30 people. So let's go hide.

LAURA: We still need to hide. And heal.

TALIESIN: Let's at least follow the path, find a place where we can hide, and recuperate.

LAURA: Around the corner or something. Can we stealth further down?

MATT: You can try to. You currently are carrying two large solid stone statues with you, so it's definitely possible, but you're going to have to come up with a creative way of doing so.

TALIESIN: Grog had the rug, didn't he?

MATT: Grog had the entire bag of holding.

TALIESIN: Shit!

MARISHA: I'm going to go ahead and cast Pass Without a Trace on the party.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: Percy, I think you and I are on Tiberius duty.

TALIESIN: Yes. (sighs) Okay.

SAM: If we do not move, will this 30 duergar mass hit us at some point?

MATT: You can find out.

SAM: Oh, Jesus (laughs)

ORION: It's like asking the future.

LAURA: Can I use my robe of infinite twine, which I have on my person in another game before. Because it's connected to my rope. Can I use that and tie it around Kima and hook it to Trinket so he can drag Kima along?

MATT: You can.

LAURA: Okay.

TALIESIN: Very clever.

MATT: So I will say for this circumstance as you guys are preparing this: casting the spell, beginning dragging the stone. The group make an initiative check.

SAM: We took too much time!

LAURA: We should just run.

TALIESIN: Natural 20.

MATT: Yeah, you have some flashing, there we go.

MARISHA: That's been a kind die to you.

MATT: So, 20 plus whatever your initiative modifier is.

TALIESIN: 27.

MATT: 27.

MARISHA: 13.

ORION: Who cares.

SAM: Ten.

ASHLEY: 12.

LAURA: 17.

LIAM: 15.

MATT: All right.

SAM: Distract them. Get them away from us.

MATT: You guys begin to drag the stone, or (chuckles) your two stone companions across the jagged obsidian floor in this deep, dark cavern. The heat from the nearby lava fall is still causing you to sweat profusely, and you're sore from the previous battle you just endured. Those of you who are wounded, you can feel the stretch of the muscles and tearing of what sinew has taken damage in the process. As you begin to pull, parallel to this duct of lava that pours off the side of Emberhold, you keep low so that you aren't actually blocking the light source, which would be a very keen visual to anything that's looking in that direction from a distance, but you slowly make your way across. At this point, the duergar have not been able to get there before you guys move off from the side, so they haven't caught up to the position you were previously, but they're beginning to swarm around the sides, and you see them yelling at each other and shouting commands. Some of them are starting to grab large rocks and fill in areas of the stronghold. Some of them you can see are robed individuals begin casting spells. You can see portions of other stone walls beginning to mount up and try and block the flow from the interior and exterior of Emberhold. However, you guys are still within eyesight, technically, of any duergar on that side of the fortress, so I'm going to ask everyone now to make a stealth check. Those that are pulling the statues with disadvantage.

LAURA: So that's Trinket.

ORION: Plus ten.

LAURA: But we all add plus ten?

MATT: Correct. To the final roll.

LAURA: Okay.

LIAM: I have a question. If I have advantage for other reasons– I have a cloak of elvenkind which gives me advantage– does the advantage and disadvantage cancel out into one?

MATT: They do. Your foot being wounded, though, is a disadvantage right now.

LIAM: Right.

MATT: So that then goes back down to disadvantage.

SAM: Can't win with this guy.

MATT: Just for this circumstance, unfortunately. You're dragging a statue with a partially melted foot right now.

TALIESIN: Liam, it doesn't matter.

MARISHA: You still have plus ten to the roll because Pass Without a Trace.

MATT: So?

SAM: 14.

MATT: Plus the ten?

SAM: That's including the ten.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: 22.

TALIESIN: 11.

ASHLEY: 20. That's my low roll.

LAURA: That's 20 for Trinket and 29 for me.

LIAM: 25.

MATT: All right, so you keep hunched low, slowly (stone grinding noise) dragging these stone obelisks of individuals across the jagged floor. You seemingly do so without any of the duergars' eyes catching you through the low light of the cavern. Partially due to the fact that you guys are doing a pretty decent job and partially the fact they're more obsessed that the central piece of their fortress right now is essentially about to be completely filled with molten rock. About 20, 25 minutes or so, you manage to pull just past where the lava flow dips down into what looks like a small opening in the flooring, and you are past the immediate heat of the magma river. You are now pressed up against the wall of the cavern as it begins to twist around and head downward, further deeper into this subterranean mountainous space. You're all beaten, you're all sore, and currently, what do you want to do?

TALIESIN: Keyleth, can you cover the entrance to where we are to give us a little bit more of a stealthy–

MARISHA: No.

LAURA: No more spells?

MARISHA: I am exhausted. I can't do anything else right now.

LIAM: And what's the terrain? Is it just flat out out in the open to see, or is it scoured with ins and outs? Peaks and valleys?

MATT: It's the same type of topography you've encountered when you first entered this giant cavern. So you can see large, crooked black spires of obsidian rock shooting up and curving towards the ceiling. It's all over the place.

MARISHA: I can make another Hallucinatory Terrain. I can do that still.

LAURA: Okay, maybe you can make it–

MARISHA: Can I make it to where it just looks like a wall?

MATT: How long does it last?

MARISHA: I think Hallucinatory Terrain lasts an hour, if I think about it. Books, books, where's my book?

LAURA: Can I look around and see if there's anywhere that looks like we could hide, tuck in between rocks or something where we wouldn't be visible?

TALIESIN: Please.

MATT: Go ahead and make a perception.

LAURA: Oh wait, I get an advantage.

MATT: Because you are in the Underdark, correct.

LAURA: 20.

MARISHA: It lasts for 24 hours.

SAM: 24 hours!

TALIESIN: Put a lava flow in front of us.

SAM: But you have to be concentrating the whole time. And you can't. You can't go to sleep.

LAURA: 20.

MATT: As she's glancing at that, you make your way about ten minutes away from the area where the rest of the group is currently gathered, keeping a very very close eye on the topography of the wall of the cavern as it slowly curves around and further in that direction. You do manage to find portions of the wall that jut out and leave these small pockets. They themselves might not be super safe for a long period of time, but they give you a little bit of–

LAURA: Cover.

MATT: Little bit of cover, depending on how well you were to dress. You might be able to see few individuals discovering you if you were to stay there.

LAURA: Okay. Let's do that.

MARISHA: It's not a concentration spell. It just takes a minute to cast and it lasts for 24 hours. So I'm going to go ahead and cast it and make it look like there's just a wall with another lava flow that's come out, and is starting to happen.

MATT: Okay, so as you walk back to notify the party, you watch as a portion of the mountain seemingly out of nowhere, extends, and a lava flow appears, pouring out of the wall.

MARISHA: Wait, was someone not inside?

SAM: No, we're all in.

MATT: She was out and about while you did this.

LAURA: I was searching for another place to hide.

LIAM: It's fine. It's an illusion. Vax pokes his head through the illusionary lava and goes, We're in here.

LAURA: Oh! Lovely.

MATT: So your heart rate eventually normalizes. You do have a decent pocket of space here that as long as nothing attempts to walk into the wall, you should be okay to rest here.

TALIESIN: So we have some time. Let's regroup.

LAURA: I think we should probably–

TALIESIN: Sleep in shifts.

MARISHA: Wait, here's what I'm afraid of. If we sleep we could lose Grog's trail. He could be nearby right now.

TALIESIN: We're not much use to anyone right now.

SAM: Let's just make a decision right now to leave Grog and continue on.

ASHLEY: No!

SAM: Let's just forget about him. He was a good friend.

LAURA: What?!

SAM: We'll have a toast to him.

LAURA and ASHLEY: Scanlan!

SAM: We'll sing about songs of his memory.

MARISHA: You are shitting with us, right?!

SAM: Within a few days we'll forget he ever existed.

TALIESIN: Scanlan, no one else wants to go to a whorehouse with you. You'll be going to whorehouses alone.

SAM: All right, fine.

TALIESIN: Thank you.

LIAM: Here's another option. My foot hurts, but I'm not too bad. How are you?

LAURA: (sighs) I'm okay.

LIAM: We could go look.

LAURA: Or maybe I can use my tracking and see if I can catch a scent. Grog does smell.

MARISHA: I can use my beast sense; that is one more thing I can still do. I could theoretically– We could use Trinket.

LIAM: We need to undo the stone that has taken over Tiberius and Kima.

TALIESIN: Do I have the necessary tools to synthesize a potion out of the basilisk blood?

MATT: You can certainly try. It's a very ramshackle set-up. You do not have an alchemical set, but you can certainly attempt to, using a small fire, a couple of your general smelting tools you use for your metal work. You could attempt to distill it down, but that would be a combination of a tinkering roll on your point, followed up by somebody else's medicine roll to attempt to properly prepare it.

LAURA: Are all of Tiberius's things stone with him?

MATT: Yes.

ASHLEY: I'm going to walk over to Tiberius and cast Greater Restoration on him.

MATT: Okay. So as you're having this discussion. Tiberius, you briefly go from this moment in the heat of combat where you feel your muscles intensify and tensing up and not answering to your mind's command as you look up angrily at a series of duergar that have just been blown up by a fireball, to cold taking yourself. And as the cold fades, you are now in the center of a gargantuan cavern surrounded by all of your friends. You guys watch as Tiberius's form fades in through the stone.

MARISHA and ASHLEY: Tiberius!

LAURA: Good job Pike!

SAM: I was so worried about you!

TALIESIN: Or we could cast a spell. That also works well.

ORION: (Dwarven accent) What the hell is going on?

ASHLEY: I didn't know if that was going to work.

MARISHA: But that the only time you can do that, right?

LAURA: Wait, she can't do that again? You can't do it again for Kima.

ASHLEY: I have another 5th level now, so I could do it again.

LAURA: And once we rest, you'll have it again?

ORION: (Dwarven accent) Whoa. What happened to all the other little dwarves?

SAM: You don't have to do the accent anymore.

LAURA: You probably should keep your voice down, Tiberius.

ORION: Well, this is just how I sound.

ASHLEY: No. We already got through. We're on the other side. You don't have to act like a god anymore.

LAURA: Grog is missing, actually.

ORION: (Dwarven accent) Oh, great.

LAURA: And the queen took him.

SAM: Are you stuck like this?

ORION: No, I could change back anytime I want, but I really like how I look.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Are we going to rest?

SAM: Wait, but what about Kima?

MARISHA: We have to find Grog!

LAURA: We have to find Grog but we have no spells. If we do find him, we can't do anything!

SAM: Can you unstone Kima now or?

ASHLEY: I can, but then I wouldn't have another 5th level.

ORION: (Dwarven accent) Clarota, what do you think we should do?

MATT: Clarota, who is currently like staring at the statue of Kima, you can see there's a brief bead of thought behind Clarota's eyes and the voice sinks into the rest of your minds simultaneously. “We may be able to leave her here for safekeeping.”

ORION: I knew you were going to say that. A different option. Oh, and thank you, Pike.

ASHLEY: You're welcome, Tiberius.

(all laugh)

MATT: “If you insist on bringing her, then we should do it soon. We should not be leaving anything behind. Trace of our passage.”

LIAM: Where did your kin take our big friend?

MATT: Clarota thinks for a second and says, “It was not my kin that took him but the duergar. If anything, I imagine he might be residing within that infernal city, though if they've taken him elsewhere I do not know the way of the ash-skins.”

ORION: But Kima does.

LAURA: We should wake her up.

ORION: Pike, you can do it one more time and take a little rest, right?

ASHLEY: I am going to walk on over to Kima. Touch her. Cast Greater Restoration again.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Where do you touch her? (laughs)

ASHLEY: I touch her arm.

MATT: Okay.

TALIESIN: Don't cheapen this.

MATT: Classy. As you reach out, the divine energy emanates from Pike's hand that begins to cascade across Kima's form. Kima, who is in mid battle, with her greatsword in the air, as soon as her flesh returns to her, she finishes her swing.

ASHLEY: I put my shield up!

MATT: However, it does (ping) into the side of your shield and you deflect the blow and you see Kima for a second is like, (panting slowing to normal breathing).

LIAM: Easy! Easy!

ASHLEY: Calm down!

MATT: She throws the blade down on the ground and goes, “I am so sorry.”

ASHLEY: It's okay! You were mid-swing, I get it. We are fine it was just a shield. We're fine.

MATT: She reaches around and she pulls her symbol of Bahamut out from her around her neck and just clutches it for a second and says, “What happened?”

LAURA: You were turned to stone, the king got killed, the queen took Grog, we don't know where.

SAM: And Clarota was really helpful to us.

LAURA: Actually, Clarota got you out of that castle alive.

MATT: She turns around and glares at Clarota briefly with a look of confusion and mistrust and Clarota just goes–

(all laugh)

LIAM: You honestly would not be here if it weren't for the illithid. It's true.

MATT: She glances back at you and gives under her breath, “And there's a good chance none of us may be here if it gets its way down the road. (louder) Nevertheless, I thank you. It is good to know at least we took one of their top champions down. The fact that the queen still exists is worrisome, as at least from what I seemed to gather she had the true reign over most of the duergar down here.”

ORION: Do you know where she would be at?

MATT: “Where did she escape? How did she take him?”

LIAM: She disappeared with our goliath friend.

LAURA: (gasps) Oh my gosh. Wait, did I Hunter's Mark the queen?

LIAM: Yes, you did.

LAURA: Did I?

TALIESIN: You did.

LAURA: I can use my Hunter's Mark to track her!

SAM: You can?

(all cheer)

SAM: How long does it last and how does it work?

LIAM: But that was just 30 minutes ago.

SAM: I know, but we all have to rest.

LAURA: It maintains for up to eight hours!

SAM: Eight hours, but we have to rest!

ASHLEY: Because we need to heal. I am pretty low.

SAM: I'm at two.

ASHLEY: You're at two?!

MARISHA: Okay. Theory? Proposition? Proposal. What if we use your Hunter's Mark, figure out where she is, get there, camp out nearby, tackle it in the morning?

LAURA: Can I use my Hunter's Mark to find out where she is and then we rest and go there?

MATT: You can attempt that.

ASHLEY: What if we took a short rest?

LAURA: Wait, wait, wait. Let's just find out where she is first.

ASHLEY: What if we just took a seven-hour nap?

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: Because that's all really anyone sleeps anyway.

TALIESIN: I think six hours is about what it takes.

MATT: Six to eight hours is the general long rest period that I would allow for that.

LAURA and ASHLEY: Okay.

LIAM: I think we should all rest for a moment. I think Vex'ahlia and I should go out for an hour or two, just to see which direction– I mean, they are not going to back to Emon.

LAURA: I've got Hunter's Mark! Just stay put, Footless!

(all laugh)

ORION: Wait a minute. What happened to your toe?

SAM: You're not stealth anymore. You got a busted foot. You're at disadvantage on everything.

LIAM: I was pretty awesome 30 minutes ago. Now I'm just slightly less awesome.

SAM: Can we at least heal you up, before you go?

LAURA: Yes. Just give us one second. Can I use the freaking Hunter's Mark?

SAM: How does it work?

LAURA: I don't know!

MATT: So you take a moment, you step beyond the boundary of the illusion momentarily, close your eyes and concentrate on that small blip of nature based divine energy that you lent and grappled onto Queen Ulara with. You take a moment and concentrate and you recall her face, you recall, strangely, her scent. In a weird way, the bestial nature of your connection with Trinket and nature, scent is a very strong means of tracking and the scent of a duergar is a very terrible mix between salty brine and earth.

LIAM: Like Axe for Men?

MATT: Essentially, yeah, yeah. It's Ye Olde Axe. You concentrate on this and you recall the stronghold, you begin to see a trace where all of a sudden her path in the stronghold is fading and is cold. A new path has opened up in the center of the duergar city at the base of the stronghold. It seems to have moved slightly in that direction, but you can't pinpoint where, and is currently at rest somewhere in that vicinity.

SAM: She is still close.

LAURA: (whispers) The city, they're close. (louder) So that is right in front of the keep?

MARISHA: Wait. Are they in an underground base?

LAURA: They are in the city.

MATT: Essentially, where the cavern kind of rises up and meets the wall, Emberhold is at the top of that rising of the ground, and Emberhold lies there, where all the lava pours down and trickles down. You guys are off to the side. This whole portion of the floor that crawls up to Emberhold is covered in duergar buildings. It is a small city that surrounds it. She resides somewhere in the center of that.

MARISHA: So we're on the same level as them or are they above us?

MATT: They are a little bit above. You guys are at a lower point, as the actual ground you follow curves around and descends.

SAM: But once we walk out of here we will be at the same level.

MARISHA: I have a theory. I've a new skill that I've recently learned and was practicing a lot when I was with the Earth Ashari while we were gone for the past six months. They taught me the ways of the earth elementals.

ORION: Oh, that's fun.

MARISHA: So. And as an earth– but I am still new at it.

ASHLEY: That's okay, we all start somewhere.

MARISHA: Thank you, Pike.

ASHLEY: You're welcome.

MARISHA: Thank you. I mean I am a little self-conscious about it still, but I can travel through the earth.

LAURA: And pop up, perhaps, where she is?

ORION: (Dwarven accent) Ooh, like a little gopher.

LAURA: All of us? Or just you?

MARISHA: It is not a burrowing thing, right?

MATT: You glide through the earth.

LIAM: More like a Shadowcat kind of thing?

MATT: Essentially.

LAURA: Is it all of us or just you?

MARISHA: Just me. But I could get inside.

LAURA: Well, but then you will be alone, surrounded by duergar and Grog.

MARISHA: Well, I am not talking about right now.

ASHLEY: Could we put invisibility on her?

MARISHA: If we do some sort of flanking thing.

LIAM: Well that does sound useful.

TALIESIN: It is. It is going to be useful.

MARISHA: I am wondering if we can make a tunnel, though. I can theoretically– okay, theoretically we could rest and I could keep all of my spells and use all of my magical focus to tunnel us out, depending on how far we are going. We can do an underground approach

LIAM: But concretely, right now we need nappies.

MARISHA: Yeah.

TALIESIN: Let's sleep.

MARISHA: But what if they leave while we sleep?

LIAM: But we are essentially powerless.

TALIESIN: And what are we going to do if we find them?

LAURA: I'm going to only sleep for a little bit, cause I didn't use all my spells I only need to rest for half the amount of time, maybe.

MATT: It doesn't work that way.

(all laugh)

MATT: A solid six hours you'd probably be able to, since you guys are in a hidden area you'll feel more comfortable, depending on how you set your bedding here you could probably do it in six hours.

LAURA: I think we'll be fine. Because she needs to rest as well. We hurt her pretty badly.

LIAM: I think it is safe to assume she's brought Grog back to her seat of power. Why would she go anywhere else? She's at her strongest where she is.

TALIESIN: I think they're staying.

SAM: We're going to rest.

LIAM: Sleep.

MARISHA: Okay. All right.

LAURA: We've got to sleep, Keyleth.

ASHLEY: I know. You're right. I see what you're saying, but we need to…

SAM: Grog will be fine.

ASHLEY: He's at a two!

MARISHA: I'm so mad at him. Why'd he get stolen?

MATT: Kima comes over, Kima puts her hand out a little bit and says, “It's all right, he's a strong one, he can handle himself. If I could survive what I've been through, he can do far better than that. Rest is good. I think we need to take some time, discuss our plan of attack, our current direction, and decide on how we'll move forward.” She glances briefly over at Clarota, who's now further back towards the wall just sitting in this meditative state. “So. Let us rest.”

TALIESIN: Brilliant idea.

LIAM: One last thing before we lay our heads down for the night. Pike, do you have any salve or anything you could help me put on my foot, or could your god help with my little toe?

MARISHA: I could help you with some natural mediciney stuff, maybe.

LIAM: It stings a bit.

MATT: You have not encountered a person with any sort of physical marring to this degree, necessarily, and those that usually did, it was a permanent thing. So this is something that you would have to experiment with.

ASHLEY: Could I try healing? A very concentrated energy just on his foot? A healing spell?

MATT: You could certainly try.

LAURA: You can do it, Pike.

MARISHA: Is there anyway I could assist her?

MATT: Possibly. All right.

ASHLEY: Let's try it.

MARISHA: Possibly?

LIAM: I mean a clockwork foot from Percy does sound cool.

ASHLEY: If we're going to rest, it doesn't hurt to try.

MARISHA: That way we can sleep on it.

ASHLEY: You can sleep on it.

LIAM: Literally.

LAURA: Maybe this yellow vial of potion could do something for it as well.

LIAM: That's Ben-gay.

ASHLEY: I'll try Cure Wounds at, I'll try 4th level, since we're going to sleep.

MATT: All right so go ahead and roll the corresponding dice for that.

ASHLEY: So I roll…

MATT: 4d8 plus five Is what it would be.

LAURA: Why do you keep putting your foot up near me?

(all laugh)

LAURA: Can I keep an ear out for anything approaching?

MATT: Very much so.

ASHLEY: Wait, plus my spell caster–

MATT: Plus your modifier, which is five.

MARISHA: I start building a positive chi. Like a healing chi ball.

SAM: Is she doing a standard healing here? Is my song of rest going to help at all?

MATT: Your song of rest would actually be of aid to this.

SAM: Okay. So I'm going to sing while you heal, if that's all right.

ASHLEY: Please do.

MATT: All the healers convene, Scanlan begins–

MARISHA: I light some sage.

SAM: Okay, ready? (singing) Wherever you go, whatever damage they've done, we will be right here waiting to heal you. No matter what hit points you take or how your foot breaks, we will be right here–

SAM AND ASHLEY: Waiting for you.

LIAM: All that improv school paid off.

(all laugh)

MATT: As you take the healing energy you've gathered from your own nature-based casting, you infuse the healing spell. You do how many points of healing from the spell?

ASHLEY: 27.

MATT: 27. Go ahead and make a medicine check.

MARISHA: Is this what I can maybe assist her with?

LAURA: It looks really disgusting by the way. It's so gross.

ASHLEY: What do I roll? Do I roll the 20?

MATT: Roll a d20, and add your proficiency modifier

LIAM: Can I apply my Luck feat to her?

LAURA: You don't have any feet left.

(all laugh)

SAM: Feet pun!

ASHLEY: 21.

MATT: 21. As you finish the spell, you can see where the mostly-gone second small toe has grown to mostly a full toe, and there's a small stub where the little one is.

LAURA: You've got a toe nubbin.

ASHLEY: Hey man, we got a little stub. A little bit.

MATT: You're promoting a level of divine regeneration at a very, very slow pace. You've never attempted this before, and there is some progress, but this may be an over time thing you have to do.

ASHLEY: Over time, I just keep doing it?

MATT: Once a day, you might want to attempt this and eventually he probably will recover. But not immediately.

SAM: Until then, he's a gimp.

LIAM: I think I see Pike's deity in my toenail!

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: It's gonna take time. That was just a little manicure that we did real quick.

MARISHA: We could just own it and call you–

TALIESIN: Little piggy?

MARISHA: Well I was going to say Vax the Nine-Toe.

LIAM: And put a knife on it?

TALIESIN: Could put a very tiny knife on it.

LAURA: A teeny tiny little knife.

TALIESIN: Could actually give you a nail clipper. You could clip your own nails.

MARISHA: We can get you a prosthetic little toe that has a little compartment for poison.

LIAM: I would take a brass claw.

MARISHA: Or a brass claw toe. That's fun. Maybe we could get you a raptor claw. That's cool.

TALIESIN: Let's sleep.

SAM: Before we go to sleep, I go over to Kima and I say to her, Lady Kima, I think we're all going to take a rest and you as well, correct?

MATT: “I think I should.”

SAM: We can trust you while we're all asleep not to do anything to any of our companions, correct?

MATT: “If you're worried about the mind flayer, I'll be keeping an eye, but nothing beyond that. Remember: he has to make the side-step, the wrong step, before I take any action. Trust and know that if I were to strike a blow, it's at his own poor choice and actions.”

ORION: That first part of what you said rhymed.

SAM: Does she seem to be telling the truth?

MATT: Make an insight check.

SAM: A what? What check?

MATT: Insight.

SAM: Insight. Okay, 18.

MATT: She seems to be true.

SAM: Okay.

MATT: She is legitimately concerned about Clarota. But also understands that at this moment, it has not done anything to necessarily draw her blade.

LIAM: Lady Kima, Clarota, may I suggest you take the first watch?

SAM: (laughs) Oh my god, what if they start fucking?

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: So it's going to be that sort of evening, excellent.

LIAM: Rated M, for mature.

MATT: Clarota says, “Should you insist.” And Clarota's image shimmers and vanishes.

ORION: Sweet.

TALIESIN: I'm falling asleep.

MATT: As you guys are all going to sleep, Kima's still sharpening her sword and she stops for a second and goes, “Everyone, I'm sorry you've lost your friend. If he lives, we shall find him.”

LAURA: He will live.

TALIESIN: And we will find him.

ASHLEY: No, he will, Scanlan! You just calm down.

MATT: “But if they have indeed taken him prisoner and Emberhold is lost, there is only one place they would bring him: Yug'Voril.”

LAURA: (gasps) With the dude with the black horn.

MATT: “Considering the mess that you've made since entering their realm of living and work, you'd make for a great gift to their current standing demigod. If we aren't able to find him within the city, I think that may be the next place to look.”

MARISHA: Once again, are you afraid they're going to take him while we're asleep? Is this a genuine concern? Is this something we should move on now?

MATT: “Not as long as you're keeping concentration, we should be fine.”

LAURA: I'm concentrating so hard.

(all laugh)

LIAM: We're busted up.

TALIESIN: There's legitimately nothing to be done.

MATT: There's a softness that hits Kima's face and you can see a bit of a quiver to her chin and she goes, “The guilt I feel for unknowingly putting you all in danger for my sake is immense. It's because of me and my actions that you even delved this far and nearly lost life and limb, merely at the behest of Allura and… I want you all to know that I appreciate it. I really, truly do.”

ORION: That's great. If you can mention that to Allura, that'd be wonderful.

MATT: “I would really appreciate it to speak to Tiberius.”

ORION: (mumbles, makes spell sounds, returns to normal voice) I would really appreciate it if you mentioned that to Allura. I'm trying to get into her good graces and whatnot.

MATT: She chuckles a moment and says, “All right. Allura is a good friend. Well we've known each other for… gods, 15 years now. Since we defeated the Scourged Rider, together. But she has always had more of a political mind than I do, so, when we were both offered a seat on the council of Tal'Dorei and Emon she stayed, and I… I'm a woman of action, and I knew my destiny was out in the world.”

ORION: We share something in common, Lady Kima. I, too, have left my home and land because I did not want to sit on the council of Draconia. With blessings from my father and such, I gained ambassadorship on a mission for them, but really, just so I could–

MATT: Her eyes have glazed over and are staring off into the distance.

(all laugh)

ORION: To get all the things out, and I saw this wonderful lamb in this field one time–

MATT: “I was speak to Allura of your honor and deeds, Tiberius. We try to have drinks and swap stories every few months. She's a good one.”

ORION: Yes, I think so.

MATT: She takes a moment to herself and looks around at the rest of you and says, “The cruel king. Who dealt the final blow?”

SAM: (clears throat) That would be the kingslayer. Me.

MATT: She steps up and walks over to you and puts a hand on your shoulder and gives you a stern look in the eye and shakes your shoulder. She's a halfling, so she's not too much taller than you.

(all laugh)

SAM: (laughing) Oh, okay.

MATT: “Good. The cruel king is down, and I thank you for that.” She walks back to the little perch on the rock at the side of the wall and says, “He tried to break me. Relish in his false superiority. Dragging hooks across my flesh, underestimating the will of a servant of Bahamut.”

MARISHA: Are you congratulating us for being murderers? Is that what you're doing right now?

MATT: “Murder and justice are two entirely different things and the deities of all good saw to it that this King's time was limited.”

MARISHA: Are you suggesting now that we control the wills of the deities?

MATT: “No, but we enact them, as long as we work within your plans to keep us safe.”

MARISHA: That's mighty bold and presumptuous of you.

MATT: “My life has been given to guidance of the platinum dragon, who has not seen nothing but the positive direction for all of your species, mine and the rest of humanity, that exists in the material plane. You would do well to not disrespect one who looks out for you, even though you may not look up to him for guidance. The reason these lands that you grew up in are safe and free, as much as they are, are because of the sacrifices of my brethren who came before me under his light and guidance. I'm not saying you to worship him– each one has their own gods of choice. I just say, show some respect.”

MARISHA: I do show respect, Lady Kima. I show respect when I feel that respect has been earned.

ORION: She's royalty, you have to understand.

SAM: We're all a bit cranky. Maybe we should just turn in.

MATT: “I watched as they executed my companions! The wondrous men and women who came down to these caverns at my sides with my coin in their pockets, with the promise of justice. And they laughed as they cut their throats before me, hoping it would be able to crack me. It was Bahamut's strength that held me there.”

MARISHA: Lady Kima, I am not saying that what we are doing here is not just. I only wish that you understand– and I humbly thank you for your appreciation and thanks for coming down here to rescue you. But you are correct. We have lost a friend. Someone who we have been through a lot with, way more than we have been with you. So. Before we start boasting congratulations and you start thanking us, why don't you wait? And we'll see what happens when we all get out of here first.

LIAM: She's suffering from PTSD. Why are you poking the badger?

LAURA: Maybe we should just calm down and go to sleep.

MATT: Kima takes a step forward towards Keyleth. And as you look up at her face, there's a tension, but you can see now that she's stepped near in to you, towards what little bit of light seems to cascade through this cavern, there are tears streaking down her face.

LAURA: How do you feel now?

(all laugh)

MATT: “They tried all they could to break me, but I knew my destiny would not end here. I have a destiny that does not end here.”

ASHLEY: I reach out really slowly and give her a handkerchief.

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: And then retreat.

TALIESIN: Lady Kima, as I'm sure you know, grief speaks before sense.

MARISHA: All I'm saying, Lady Kima, is that after what we have done and what we have been through and the lives and the blood that even I have on my hands, you had better be worth it.

TALIESIN: Let us wait for talk of worth and talk of might until we are reunited.

MATT: She puts a hand up towards you. “Child, let me explain to you why we are here. As while you may have stepped into the pretense of keeping me out of harm's way, there is a purpose that I and now all of us serve, here in the Underdark. Now, I've been on this journey for more than a year, traveling wherever the wind took me, finding where my gift would find an end to suffering, justice to the wicked and comfort to the downtrodden. I'd just returned from the frozen tundra northeast of these Cliffkeep mountains, heading to meet with Allura, the same friend who brought you here.”

ORION: I pop out of my sleep. Did you say Allura again?

MATT: “Shh.”

ORION: I'm sorry.

LAURA: Tiberius. Shh.

MATT: “My vision came to me. I'm sure you're familiar with visions. The great platinum dragon bestowed upon my humble self a dream. I saw an ancient vision of the great and terrible god of undeath himself: Orcus. His crimson, leathery skin and endless wings rumbling through the Abyss itself. He had chosen a champion, one that would unite the material world and the heart of the Abyss, bringing a doorway of oblivion to our world. He cut from his own head two of his terrible black horns, placing them upon the brow of this chosen warrior, his avatar to these realms, granting him power no mortal should ever have. I saw heroes, long forgotten, rise up to destroy this shadow champion, losing much in the ensuing battle. Loss, far more than you or I will ever know. The body of the avatar was burned away, but the horns of Orcus remained. Untouched by flame, blade, nor divine judgement. These keepers of the horns had a title that time has taken and the whereabouts of the artifacts that had been, thankfully, lost as well. Until the next dream dispelled my confusion. I felt a cackling entity of immense power, who had discovered one of the holding vaults, never meant to be found. This creature obsessed, spent all their attention to unlock the promised treasure within and over time, they did. One of the two horns had found a new champion, one who now resides deeper within the Underdark here. One we've now known to be called K'varn. This one who has united the illithid and the duergar alike under a banner of madness, expansion, and mockery of life. I've seen these experiments, as have you. This is what I came down here to dispose of, once and for all. Now, I hired some of the finest warriors in Kraghammer for this, all of whom have been slain or worse. That guilt weighs upon my soul. And this very quest, whoever this K'varn monstrosity, it holds the horn of Orcus upon its brow. My visions have told me that we must destroy it and must do so soon. If it had already unlocked the artifact's true potential, Kraghammer would be a ruin before you even arrived. But it's only a matter of time. We must end K'Varn and retrieve this horn and return it to the Tal'Dorei council to discuss how to seal it once more, hopefully for all of eternity. Your friend's loss is a terrible thing, but we will try to find him and should we not, understand that his sacrifice was not in vain. For we're here not to save one, but thousands, hundreds of thousands of lives, if we succeed. So we sleep, we rest, we find your friend and we destroy this, this abomination, this anathema.”

MARISHA: Lady Kima, I only hope you do not eventually become what you fear so much. Good night.

SAM: Sleep tight.

MATT: She picks up her blade, sits back down and goes back to sharpening (sounds of a sharpening stone hitting blade).

LAURA: That was weird, right? Good night.

TALIESIN: That went well.

SAM: Pike, I'll cuddle you for warmth, if that would help?

ASHLEY: It's already so hot in here with all the lava and stuff, I would just prefer to sleep alone. I'm sorry.

SAM: That's fine. That's what I meant.

MARISHA: I turn into Minxie form and go off in the corner and curl up in the corner.

LIAM: Scanlan, I'm very cold.

(all laugh)

SAM: You know what? We better let that foot heal. We better let it heal.

LAURA: Trinket, go sleep with Vax.

LIAM: That's a good idea. Come here, Trinky. Trink!

MATT: (bear sounds and sniffing)

LIAM: Who wants nibbles?

MATT: Trinket comes up and curls next to you. The evening goes by, uneventful. Occasionally, you stumble out of your rest, keep an eye out. The beacon still resides. From what you can imagine, a natural body sleep cycle that you're used to passes. A few begin to wake up before the others, as you have no daylight to ascertain whether it is day or night. Indeed, who knows what it is at this point.

ORION: I relieved myself in the middle of the night.

LAURA: Thank you for telling us, Tiberius.

SAM: Did you get up?

MATT: Just wake up in a puddle of his own dragonborn filth?

ORION: I did my dragonborn business and buried it. As we do.

LAURA: So have we healed completely?

MATT: Yes, you've all healed completely at this point. You had an evening's rest.

SAM: Do we get all our spells back and stuff?

MATT: You get your spells back.

MARISHA: We have to pick them for the day, right?

SAM: I can do things again.

MARISHA: Yeah, hang on, got to think about this.

ORION: Put some Greater Restorations in there.

MATT: Your mark? Wait, your mark, your Hunter's Mark, which you can feel, the magic of it is slowly waning as the spell comes to the end of its effective period, is moving.

LAURA: (gasps) Where's it moving?

MATT: It's moving out of the city.

LAURA: Where, which direction?

MATT: Best you can tell, it's heading towards the opposite side of the cavern towards where it curves down, deeper and below.

LAURA: Wait. Where is that in relation to us?

MATT: To where you guys are? If you're looking out from next to the Emberhold, it's to your right, curving down and around.

LAURA: We should go that direction.

MARISHA: I go and cast Pass Without a Trace on us.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: This is suddenly turning into Labyrinth. “Beyond the Goblin city…”

MATT: To take back the child, which you have stolen.

LAURA: You have no power over me.

SAM: The way we came in the city was through the side path, right?

MATT: Yes, the side of Emberhold, which you followed the curvature of this giant cavern around and you slept on the side, up against the wall, using the illusion, the illusory terrain.

SAM: So we're already–

MATT: You're already away from Emberhold, you're on the side of the wall, maybe about a quarter to a half a mile further down.

SAM: But if we keep going, we'll get to the–

MATT: You'll head down further into the cavern, seemingly in the direction where her Hunter's Mark is currently leading, which has now faded.

SAM: Okay! Your Hunter's Mark is gone.

LAURA: Well, it went that way. We should go.

SAM: So, let's go. Let's just hurry.

LAURA: As stealthily as possible so we don't alert the entire freaking camp.

TALIESIN: We've got Pass Without a Trace, so we should be all right.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: I try to make it look like we weren't around this area as much as possible without our Dust of Tracelessness.

MATT: You're sweeping behind the group as they're all moving along. With your imaginary brush.

LIAM: Trinket's doing that thing where he pulls with his front feet and drags with his behind.

TALIESIN: He's just rolling like a giant brillo brush.

MARISHA: I put Stone Shape in my Ring of Holding last night with my unused spells. I meant to tell you that last night.

MATT: That's all right. All right, you do that.

ASHLEY: Oh, I forgot you had that ring.

MATT: All right, so.

ORION: I take out my Ioun Stones.

MATT: Okay, so your Ioun Stones are now slowly rotating around your head. Well, you can only have one up at a time.

ORION: Well, I only have one.

MATT: Yeah, okay, good. You said stones, so.

ORION: Sorry. Pathfinder habit.

MATT: I know. So moving around your head slowly. All right, so the rest of you gather, you cast your spell Pass Without a Trace. You continue to crest along the outskirts of the cavern wall at this point. Looking over, you can see, throughout the night, most of the fortress, currently– the lava fall that once contained it is completely cooled and is dark. It looks like their way of stopping the flow was to stop the entire magma fall. Who knows how much damage has been done, but currently the flow is halted and you can see now, there's a number of parties of duergar that are wandering out, through the cavern, presumably in search for you.

LAURA: So technically, Lady Kima, we might be able to get back in eventually and get your weapon.

MATT: As you say that, she grins to herself and says, “I would like that very much. I had some sentimental value to that equipment.”

LAURA: And there's a vault.

MATT: “And there is a vault.”

SAM: Unless it melted.

LIAM: This will greatly enhance your ability to move forward with us, won't it?

MATT: “I think right now time is of the essence for your friend more than anything.”

LAURA: We should go look for Grog.

MATT: “Besides, I highly doubt that that stronghold has been left alone, just because it's filled with rock.”

LIAM: Maybe on the way out.

MATT: Okay, so as you guys progress on the side, I would like everybody to roll a stealth check, please.

LAURA: Oh, I don't know which one to roll.

MATT: You still have disadvantage, but you have advantage with your cloak, so you're neutralized. You're a normal roll right now.

MARISHA: (softly) Stealth check.

ASHLEY: We have advantage?

MARISHA: You have plus ten.

MATT: No, you have disadvantage still.

ASHLEY: I do not. There's no plus anything?

SAM: Plus ten.

ASHLEY: Ten still?

ORION: 29.

LIAM: Plus ten?

MATT: Plus ten.

ORION: 29.

SAM: 19.

MARISHA: 33.

TALIESIN: 17.

ASHLEY: 21.

LAURA: 24.

LIAM: 33.

LAURA: Oh, I didn't roll for Trinket. Hold on.

LIAM: Oh, Trinket rolled a one.

LAURA: Trinket, shush. Oh, I didn't feed him today, he's probably so hungry.

SAM: Have any of us eaten?

ASHLEY: We've rested.

MATT: Essentially, as opposed to having this minutiae of reminding you all to eat, I just consider when you rest and take short rests, you're snacking and resting. Otherwise, we communally spend ten minutes a game talking about what you ate. If food begins to become scarce, which it may in time, I'll let you know.

LIAM: Foot flakes anyone? Foot flakes?

MATT: It's like pork rinds (chuckles). All right. So, as you continue down this cavern, you begin to see the search parties in the distance and you keep low and watch as they pass. Some of them have small, that red glowish stone torches set out to keep their vision about. You can see a few of the parties returning to the city. Eventually, you guys begin to crest down deeper and dropping into a small decline as this giant, almost hatchback cavern where most of the duergar civilization is built in comes to an end. You begin to travel deeper, deeper into the Underdark caverns below. As you're continuing forward, you find a very very familiar scent catches your attention immediately, as you're tracking through, trying to keep your attention on possibly any sign of Grog. It's the smell of blood. It's the smell of fresh blood. Fresh-ish.

LAURA: Fresh-ish?

MATT: Fresh-ish blood, if you will. You smell fresh-ish blood. You immediately glance over and you can see on the side of this cavern, which is about 50, 60 feet wide at this point, as it's come to a pinching point leading downward, you can see a spatter of blood across the wall to your immediate left, and what looks like a mangled mass of what once was a duergar, currently just torn asunder across this rock wall.

LAURA: Oh no.

MARISHA: Does it look to be natural, done by an animal? Or does it look like people with weapons?

MATT: Go ahead and make an investigation check.

LAURA: The only time I've seen duergar split across like this was when we saw the camp of that creepy centipede creature.

LIAM: With the stalagmite coming up?

LAURA: Yeah.

MARISHA: Ten.

LAURA: Do I see any of those kind of tracks around?

MATT: You check and look around on the ground as well, you unfortunately, as you look around, you're not able to pick up the fine details. You, however, just being naturally understanding of the Underdark, as well as having the previous knowledge of inspecting the initial camp: yes, these tracks are very similar. You see what looks like these strange dragging marks on the ground, these elongated ones. No footprints. Occasionally you see what looks like a human-sized footprint as well, and then these drag marks. You also notice that there is just beyond the rock threshold, as you step over towards the wall, you see three other duergar bodies that are torn asunder. Many of them partially eaten and violently torn apart. Some parts are scarred, some sort of acidic burn, and you see tooth marks, you see claw marks and you see portions of limbs that have been pulled off by sheer force.

MARISHA: Could I do a nature check to see if I would know of a creature that could do this?

MATT: You certainly can.

LAURA: It's going to be that centipede creature thingy.

MARISHA: Ooh. 26.

MATT: 26. It's weird. There are elements of the drag marks on the ground that resemble a creature that has pseudopods or some sort of a tentacle-like mass, but you know of no natural creature that also has this power, this type of hunting technique, nor would be this far underground.

TALIESIN: I think it's another stitch monster.

LIAM: Yes.

LAURA: Stitch monster.

TALIESIN: Stitch monster.

LAURA: I like it.

TALIESIN: I do, too.

LAURA: It's a good name.

MARISHA: Something tentacle-y though. Nothing ever good is tentacle-y.

LAURA: Can I tell if Grog definitely came this way?

MATT: Go ahead and make a tracking check, so just go ahead and roll a d20. You have advantage, because you're in the Underdark.

LAURA: What do I add that to?

MATT: It should be under your tracking ability under your ranger abilities there. In your spells, under you ranger abilities. I'll see if I find it before you.

LAURA: I don't understand.

MATT: It's on the sheet I gave you, with all your character stuff.

LAURA: Oh. Okay, cool.

MATT: That one. The one that's easiest.

LAURA: Natural explorer, primeval awareness.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: I don't have any idea what I'm looking for.

(all laugh)

LAURA: I'm just looking at words right now.

MATT: It's a survival check. There you go.

LAURA: It's a survival check.

MATT: You have advantage on it.

LAURA: Okay. Oh, good. So that's 22.

MATT: 22. All right. Looking around, what you do find is, there is a very familiar scent that a goliath barbarian does have. You, using Trinket's help, as you yourself are not quite as attuned, Trinket does pick up a little bit of Grog's scent in this pathway. So Trinket (moans) gives you a nudge and points deeper down the cavern. And you can see what looks to be a smattering of small duergar-sized feet and two grooves.

LAURA: Two grooves?

MATT: About two-inch-wide grooves that continue down the path.

LAURA: I wonder if they have him prisoner now. If he came out of his mind funk.

MARISHA: Wheel tracks?

MATT: It could very well be wheel tracks.

ORION: Or they're dragging his body.

MATT: They're consistent and their width is consistent.

MARISHA: Their width is consistent? And they seem clean?

SAM: They've put him on some sort of stretcher thing.

MARISHA: Yeah, sounds like they have him on, yeah, a trailer.

LAURA: Lovely. Well, Grog definitely came this way. As did the stitch monster, so you don't have much choice but to follow.

TALIESIN: Let's continue.

ORION: Shall we?

TALIESIN: All right.

LAURA: Be aware. We're all very aware of–

MARISHA: Things.

LAURA: Any movement at all… happening.

TALIESIN: Guys, stuff.

MATT: Keeping your eyes peeled, you travel for another two and a half hours down this cavern path. It grows tighter at points where you can only really fit three or four individuals through, it's about 20, 25 feet wide, then opens up sporadically into other small pockets, where the natural topography of this portion of this Underdark cavern structure seems to weave and bend. The warmth and that sulfurous smell that was intrinsic to the duergar portion of this cavern that you were so used to, begins to slowly fade and temperature begins to drop. Still uncomfortable, but it's growing more humid as opposed to dry heat.

ORION: It's so good.

MATT: After another hour of travel, keeping your eyes out, the temperature drops significantly and is actually quite cold. The heat in the volcanic portion of this cavern structure apparently has passed you now, and you've hit an area of the rock where it is a much more chilled, much more ominous–

ORION: It's humid still?

MATT: Human?

ORION: Humid.

MATT: Humid? The humidity begins to fade as well. The air becomes a dry cold.

ORION: So we're past that.

MATT: You eventually using, which by the way the only light source you have going forward is the light from your staff.

ORION: Oh, Light!

MATT: I assume you've had it up this whole time or you've been walking in the darkness.

ORION: Oh, yes, of course.

MATT: (chuckles) You continue down and the topography, which was once the black, jagged obsidian flooring of the previous portion of the Underdark, begins to give way to a more natural gray sand-type texture. Your feet sink about a quarter inch or so with each step, and you get about ten, 15 feet before the color of the sand and the texture changes dramatically. It looks almost like a peppering of small whitish-yellow stones and rocks, as well as bits of black and grey. It's like a giant, rocky pit out in front of you.

MARISHA: What?

LIAM: Meaning it's all solid stone that color or loose gravel and rock?

MATT: You find sand and then the sand eventually gives way to like larger pieces of these rocks and stones.

MARISHA: So it's like a pebble ball pit in front of us?

MATT: Essentially.

TALIESIN: I'm looking for signs of mining.

MATT: Okay, go ahead and make an investigation check.

ORION: I'm going to make an arcana check, also.

TALIESIN: 15.

MATT: 15. Checking the walls immediately in your vicinity, you see there are signs of mining, but they're old, they haven't been used in a while. You can see some veins that are dried up. Looks like maybe the duergar had business down here mining.

MARISHA: Does it look like there– Can I do a nature check to see if this is an old lake bed? Like there is a river bed?

MATT: Sure, go and do that. What did you roll?

ORION: 11.

MATT: What are you checking?

ORION: For arcana.

MATT: What are you checking?

ORION: Just general, if I feel a general source of sinister magic anywhere.

MATT: Nothing arcane seems to emanate from the vicinity.

LIAM: Vex'ahlia, you know the Underdark. Are there any critters crawling around in that pit?

LAURA: Is this still the Underdark?

MATT: You seem to be still in the Underdark, but the Underdark in general you're familiar with; your training and studying on the denizens of it, what things to look for. This is not a natural or overall occurrence you've read about before.

LAURA: I can't sense anything or any creatures nearby?

MATT: Not per se.

MARISHA: I rolled a 16.

MATT: Rolled a 16? As you're looking around, you go and inspect the stones. What you do notice is, they're not stones. There are pieces of glass, little shards of actual volcanic glass scattered across this entire field mixed with an endless seemingly sea of small bone chunks.

LAURA: Ugh!

MARISHA: Chunks?

LAURA: Great!

MATT: Pieces of bone that have been rounded off, ground, broken.

ORION: Bone petals.

MATT: They're ancient.

MARISHA: Okay, so there appears to be– are there any whole pieces of bones? Big femurs or skulls?

SAM: This was some sort of burial ground.

MATT: It's hard to see. Most of the bones that have been here, have been around long enough to the point where they've eroded, been broken, destroyed over and over again to the point where you can't discern any of the original creatures they may have come from. It's just a sea of bone, obsidian glass, and small bits of stone that have fallen from the actual nearby cavern.

LIAM: Can we see any sort of civilized construction here? Or is this all the work of nature or some living thing?

MATT: Go ahead and make a perception check.

LIAM: 18.

MATT: 18? You look past the barrier of his light spell, because you can only get a little bit past that due to your elven low-light vision. You do notice there are occasionally some spires of natural rock, some stalagmites that are jutting out in the distance, and you see what looks like some semblance of a ruined wall just beyond the edge of the vision. Like a crumbled, small wall.

LAURA: Can I use my primeval awareness and see if I can sense Grog within six miles of us?

MATT: Certainly. All right, so how does your primeval awareness work, miss ranger?

LAURA: Oh, I can use an action to focus my awareness on a region around me and then I can sense whether– oh, well, no. It's only certain types of creatures.

MATT: Right. Which are?

LIAM: Like goliath?

LAURA: Well, no. It says “aberrations, celestials, dragons, elementals, fey, fiends, and undead”.

LIAM: That still might be useful, even if it doesn't find Grog.

MATT: What you do gather, you do sense a very strong force of aberration-based, much further, like five miles ahead, way ahead, and you have this weird, “Okay, good to know.” You don't sense anything else, but you do sense a general presence about this entire sea of bone.

ASHLEY: I've been here!

MARISHA: What?!

ASHLEY: I was here in the vision.

LAURA: Really?

ASHLEY: Yes, it was a field of broken glass and bone, and I feel like this is it.

LAURA: So what do we do?

ASHLEY: And then after that, I got to a cavern of blue crystal.

LAURA: So we have to go beyond it.

MARISHA: So we're on the right road.

ASHLEY: I think we have to go beyond this.

TALIESIN: All right.

ORION: Well, let's keep moving, then.

LAURA: Can we keep to the edge and try to not disturb the rock as much as possible.

MATT: As you move to either edge, you can see the wall comes to a straight meeting with this. Aside from the climbing the walls proper, you have no other way of traversing this.

LIAM: Could you describe the dimensions of this one more time?

MATT: Yes. The cavern itself is about 120 to 150 feet wide. You don't see the ceiling right now.

LAURA: Oh, it's that high?

LIAM: So, from our left to our right, 150 feet?

MATT: Correct.

LIAM: And is it a big circular shape?

MATT: From what you can tell, it just opens up and then continues and then darkness. You cannot see beyond it.

LAURA: Are there any rocks around us? Any big rocks?

MATT: There are a couple of small spires about 60, 70 feet out.

LAURA: Anything loose? Anything I can grab near us?

MATT: Around you? Most everything that's grab-able are part of it, yeah.

ASHLEY: We don't have the magic carpet. So never mind.

SAM: What, do you want to fly?

LIAM: I say we take a wall.

TALIESIN: Say we just gingerly try and cross against a wall.

LAURA: Yeah. Anything to throw as far as I can out and see if it–

MATT: You look around and find a small pebble, and you chuck it (sound of pebble flying through air and landing) It arcs around, bounces a bit, and comes to rest.

SAM: Let's just go.

MARISHA: No! No, I'm not touching that. Nope.

SAM: What are we going to do? Turn around? Grog's that way.

MARISHA: Okay, here's my idea. We've got that immovable rod.

ORION: Yes, I know where you're going with this, and we'd all have to make a certain–

MATT: Once again, there's something about this whole area, there's a presence about it. It's ominous, and everywhere about this floor.

MARISHA: I don't want to touch this. I feel like we should go over it.

ASHLEY: What if these bones come to life?

LAURA: Can you send your light source up? Can anybody send light up and see how high the ceiling goes?

ORION: (mumbles) Shoot an arrow, if you would, Vex, please? Wherever you wish.

LAURA: Okay.

ORION: Light!

MATT: Okay, cast out an arrow. As it shoots over, arcs through the air. You get a look of the cavern. You can see it's a large, arched, natural cavern with a number of hanging stalactites at the top. It goes up, arcs past, and then lands probably about a half a mile down the way. Really nice shot.

LAURA: Thanks.

MATT: And it lands with a (impact noise). With what little bit you can see through the arc, this path just continues and continues and continues for that full half mile.

LAURA: There's no way to avoid it.

MARISHA: There's no way to avoid it.

MATT: You do get a nice view of what looks to be more of these little, central pieces of broken wall. Looks like there was either a small series of structures or buildings that were built once within this cavern that have all completely crumbled to ruin with but a few small bastions of foundation that still remain.

LAURA: Tiberius, how many times can you cast pillars of… whatever? Pillars.

ORION: Grand Columns is the spell, Vex.

LAURA: How many times can you cast Grand Columns?

ORION: Multiple times, I guess.

LAURA: Could we potentially walk on columns across this thing? Potentially.

MARISHA: I mean, I could wall of– bend us a stone wall that's and we could just walk along the path. But it goes only so far.

ORION: Hold on a second. I've got something here.

LIAM: We're seeing the remains of buildings scattered throughout, maybe we could go from–

LAURA: What about a wall from out from the side?

MARISHA: The side? And then we walk along that side?

LAURA: Yeah!

MARISHA: Yeah, we could do that, right?

MATT: How big is the wall you can make?

LAURA: What were you going to say?

LIAM: Well, there's little islands of structure left, we could just–

LAURA: Hop.

LIAM: Stand bridge, stand bridge, stand bridge.

MARISHA: I can go 120 feet. I can make about 120 feet wall.

MATT: You saw about a quarter to a half mile. This seems to continue.

LAURA: So, that might not be enough.

SAM: She'd have to do it 20 times.

TALIESIN: I think we may just have to walk gingerly.

MARISHA: Maybe we can fashion–

ASHLEY: Should we find traps? Check for traps?

MARISHA: Can we fashion snow boots?

LIAM: Vax starts feeling along one side of the wall. Does the ground look firm and more stable on the edges? Or is it all just the same?

MATT: Do you step out a little bit into the area?

LIAM: Hand on the wall.

MATT: Hand on the wall? I mean, it's a wall.

LIAM: No, but I mean– yes.

MATT: But you step out with your hand on the wall.

LIAM: I'm not stepping out yet. I'm looking at the ground. Is it pebbles and rock all the way to the sides?

MATT: All the way up to the wall.

MARISHA: Okay.

ORION: Lady Keyleth, if you will, could you perhaps make a flat, sturdy stone tablet we could all particularly stand on.

MARISHA: Sure.

ORION: Make sure it's under a hundred pounds, if you could. Or actually, two hundred pounds, a little bit more to work with.

MARISHA: I use Stone Shape and I bend down and make a big circle where I am. Carve out a little cylinder with Stone Shape.

MATT: So, using a very earthbender-y hand motion, you take a portion of the wall right next to you, send it outward and begin to shape it into this large cylinder–

MARISHA: Disc.

MATT: Disc-like platform, that's (boof) on the ground, right at the base of the platform.

ORION: Everybody, hop on.

LAURA: Trinket, hop on this rock.

ORION: Wait a minute, how much does Trinket weigh?

LAURA: A lot.

LIAM: Is it 200?

MATT: Trinket weighs more than that.

LIAM: Trinket weighs a ton. All of us together.

MARISHA: Maybe you could just levitate Trinket behind?

ORION: I don't have that spell anymore. I need to know how much she weighs for this.

MATT: Trinket, I mean, looking at it, you haven't really weighed her yourself, you gather–

LAURA: Trinket's a boy!

MATT: Trinket weighs approximately–

(all laugh)

SAM: Trinket's a boy?! With a name like Trinket?

LIAM: Haven't you seen his wang flopping around under his tail?

MATT: Trinket's probably close to a thousand.

ORION: So here's the situation. I can get us all across, but I cannot take Trinket as well.

LAURA: I'm not leaving Trinket behind. So everybody get on that and we'll see what happens.

SAM: Why don't we go across. He can come back and get Trinket.

LAURA: Okay, yeah. How about you guys go and I'll stay with Trinket. You guys go.

LIAM: Well, I'm not going to leave her.

MARISHA: Can we make him weightless and then tug him along with the rope? We can't do that?

ASHLEY: I have a question. How many feet across?

LAURA: It's like half a mile.

MATT: Quarter to a half mile from what you can tell, like I said, you only have vision enough to where the arrow arced and it was a very long arc, that just trailed off so you gather anywhere between a quarter to a half mile.

ASHLEY: I want to run across.

(all laugh)

SAM: With your heavy armor.

LIAM: Sneak right in there.

LAURA: Oh, just do it.

ASHLEY: Wait, are we getting on the rock?

LIAM: How far is the closest little island of remaining structure that you referenced?

MATT: Oh it's probably about 60, 70 feet out.

LAURA: I don't sense any undead with my primal awareness do I?

MATT: The perpetual presence that you sense across the entirety of this bed of bone and glass, if you had to describe it, it has some sort of undead-ish realm. It's not your specialty, I mean it is, like undead creatures are, and the presence is similar to that.

ASHLEY: I get my Mace of Disruption ready.

LAURA: Oh, and Kima!

MARISHA: (gasps) Oh! We're done! We can do this! We polymorph Trinket!

ORION: That's it, yes!

MARISHA: We polymorph Trinket!

ORION: Very good.

ASHLEY: Into a tiny tiny?

ORION: Make him into a chicken.

MATT: You instinctively glance around, you look down, and you notice your holy symbol of Sarenrae has a hairline fracture in it. What was once a perfect and impeccable sphere of design– you've had this your entire life, you look down and see, you don't know how recently, but a portion of the metal symbol itself is cracked.

SAM: Oh, Pike.

ASHLEY: Oh no, this is terrible.

LAURA: Pike, pray! do something!

ORION: I motion over to Pike and I take her medallion slowly off of her and go– and bring out my Mending Wheel.

MATT: Your Mending Wheel, which was where? It was in the Bag of Holding.

ORION: No, I held that.

MATT: The Mending Wheel's this big. You haven't been carrying it with you this entire time!

ORION: What? I thought it was like this big.

MATT: (laughs) Tiberius.

ASHLEY: I'll take my symbol back, put it back on, and say, this is something that I've got to– this is something I need to deal with. We can't just put it in a Mending Wheel.

LIAM: The gods reward deeds, not words.

ASHLEY: Yes.

MARISHA: Maybe it happened in the fight.

ASHLEY: I think I know why it happened.

SAM: Maybe because you've been killing unarmed people?

ASHLEY: I think it was when I slit the guy's throat. She got mad. Just a hunch.

SAM: But you know what? We'll do some good deeds when we're done.

ASHLEY: Yeah. This is something that I need to fix, but thank you for trying.

ORION: I forgot we didn't have it.

LAURA: Well, Trinket, what do you want to be? A lizard? A mouse?

MATT: (bear noises)

LAURA: A kitten? (gasps) A kitten.

ASHLEY: A little kitty.

LAURA: You want to be a kitten?

MATT: (laughs) Trinket glances over at you with a look in the eye of like–

MARISHA: And I go (floop), and I make him a kitten. What kind of kitten?

LAURA: Oh, he's a Persian.

MARISHA: He's a Persian kitten.

MATT: Trinket's form (shwoop) shifts down into this tiny white puffball with a pushed-in nose.

LAURA: You're the cutest, Trinket.

ASHLEY: I go and I snuggle, and I nuzzle him.

LAURA: I tuck him into my shirt.

MATT: You sense immediately, Trinket is not necessarily pleased, but will deal with it.

MARISHA: Well, he's so cute.

LAURA: He's so cute.

ORION: In Draconia, those are snacks.

SAM: I wouldn't say that.

LAURA: Let's go! Come on! Let's get on this thing! Grog's getting ahead of us.

SAM: All right, let's go. On our stone airplane.

MARISHA: Let's get on the Wonkavator, everybody.

ASHLEY: All right hop on. I hop on.

MATT: All right, so you all hop onto this giant stone. It's really cramped, you're all shoulder-to-shoulder pushed onto here, clutched onto your new Persian cat. Kima and Clarota step onto it.

ORION: I cast Telekinesis on the stone slab, lift us up, and push us.

MATT: Okay, how much weight can you push through Telekinesis?

ORION: A thousand.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: I did all the math. (clears throat) Vax weighs 155, Pike weighs 75. Taliesin weighs 190, Vex weighs 120.

ASHLEY: But Scanlan weighs nothing.

ORION: Sam weighs the same, 75. Keyleth weighs 125.

MATT: Yep. Kima weighs 105. With all of her armor, she'd be 105.

SAM: Clarota can float.

MATT: Clarota can float. Does that still fall under a thousand total?

ORION: Yeah, should. Is that right?

SAM: What about you?

TALIESIN: Plus the rock.

LAURA: The rock would be less.

ORION: That's why I kept a hundred pounds for that.

MARISHA: A hundred pounds for the rock.

LIAM: Want to run those numbers again for the calculator?

MATT: Rock's 100 pounds? That's not a lot of stone.

LAURA: It's a very thin piece of stone.

MATT: That's a very thin piece of stone. All right.

ORION: Nine. Nope, we're at nine– we're there. We're at nine-something. You can do all the math, but it's nine-something.

MATT: Okay, all right, so you all stand on the platform. It (straining noises) rises up, and it's one of those all of you have to gather yourself, but nevertheless it is now floating. How long does it last, concentration wise?

ORION: Ten minutes.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: Quick! Float us!

MATT: So, as Tiberius begins to concentrate, the stone begins to glide out over this expanse of broken bone and obsidian glass.

ORION: I hover about– what's bone break?– around six feet above the air. That's how high I take it.

MATT: Okay, so you're cresting about six feet. You have to move it around occasionally to avoid some of the large stalagmites that are jutting out of the bones.

LAURA: Do we see anything? I'm keeping an eye out, see if I see any movement or anything that's maybe sparkles. I don't know.

TALIESIN: Keeping an eye behind us, as well.

MATT: Okay. You guys, keeping an eye out, you see more and more of this ruin, and you can see the further in you go, you start seeing bits of bone that are larger than what's near the edge. You start seeing bits and pieces that are full bones, so they've been more– still rounded and weathered, but they're less ground down as supposed to the edges where most of the traction seems to be. You get about 300 feet out before you hear a loud, echoing scream across the cavern. (loud yell)

ORION: In front of us?

MATT: In front of you guys.

LAURA: What's it sound like?

MATT: It's male, and it's loud.

LAURA: Go! Can we go faster?

ORION: We hear this. I push us forward. I mean, we're going in that direction anyways, so I speed us up.

LIAM: Keyleth, take the gnomes!

MATT: Correct, okay. As you speed up and continue–

ASHLEY: I jump on Keyleth.

LIAM: Take the gnomes!

MATT: Okay.

ASHLEY: Grab some feathers.

SAM: I'll grab on as well. Why not.

MATT: All right, so Keyleth, you transform maintaining concentration on Polymorph for Trinket, I believe, right? All right. It's not a spell, it's an effect you do. So you (whooshing noise) you transform into a giant eagle, you grab both the gnomes, you guys are lifted up off the platform as the platform continues to push forward.

ORION: Cool, so I get a little bit more control over it now. (grunts)

MATT: A little bit more. As you're pushing forward you feel the stone itself has this weird wobble to it, but you still manage to keep concentration, pushing forward. Eventually, the little bit of light from your Light spell cascades past one of these joining parts of a wall, and then beyond that you can see what looks like a few other stone pillars that are sticking up. And you see what looks to be a small party of duergar that are in the middle of battle. There is one duergar who is splattered across the bone floor. You see a troll that is currently in the middle of a fistfight with something that's moving extremely fast. This blur of motion. You can barely make out the physical form before the troll turns and runs in your direction, surprised to see the light coming towards you, and in its expression of extreme confusion and fear, you see something (whoosh) past, and its head just (soft falling sound). Rolls off the top of his shoulders.

LAURA: That's not Grog! We're going to toward a monster!

MATT: (crashing sound) The troll body hits the ground. As it does you see bits of bone begin to rise up and pull the troll down underneath.

LAURA: Oh, it's really good we're not standing on it!

ORION: Avoid! (whooshing sound)

LIAM: Daggers out.

TALIESIN: Guns out.

MATT: As you guys begin to push forward you can see two of the duergar are now backing up instinctually. One looks down at his feet now that have been grabbed, and he's being pulled under, and he just starts trying to wrestle himself free. This blur of motion jumps off one of the platforms, spins in the air, and lands with a slam that completely splatters across the rock that he's right next to. This duergar, you can see part of his jaw go flying off to the side and silence hits him in the middle of his scream. The last duergar there, you can see who's looking around, sees the stone platform, and goes, “Let me on! Let me on!” He goes running over and is trying to jump up towards the stone platform you guys are on.

LAURA: How much does he weigh? (giggles)

MATT: Well, he's going to go ahead and try and grab it with an athletics check– he makes it! (latching noise) He gets onto the side.

SAM: Kick him off!

MARISHA: Fuck that guy!

LAURA: I punch him in the face!

MATT: Okay, okay. You go ahead and (punch thud noise). You just beat him in the face. He holds tight. You're not a very strong person, unfortunately.

LIAM: I grab him by the cloak. What is it? What is it?

MATT: “I don't know! Get it away! Get it away!”

MARISHA: In eagle form, I'm going to do a nice high soaring lap.

SAM: We're on you!

MARISHA: I know! It's okay! I'm going to use my– I'm soaring high. It's an easy breeze. We're on the people mover. Okay. And I'm going to use my keen sight to see if I can get a good… (pew)

MATT: Okay, so, using that you glance down and in this brief moment where it seems like the cacophony of this entire circumstance slows down (slowing sound noise). And your eagle eyes glance down, and you can see in a brief moment the blur stops. You see a humanoid form. Looking at the body and the torso, it looks elven. Its very thin and gaunt legs dangling as four giant, jagged-looking tentacles sprout from both sides of its torso, holding it aloft. Two lifting it off the ground and keeping its body suspended, while two are (fwhoosh) whipping around in the process. As you're glancing, you see its head (cracking noise) glance up toward the wall. These blank, white eyes shooting around in different directions spontaneously, with this maddening look. Whatever this is is clearly insane and is currently driven on some sort of hunger bloodlust. The stitch marks you see across its body are very reminiscent of the earlier abominations that you saw, created by K'varn and sent throughout this cavern structure.

LIAM: Keyleth's the only one who sees it, though, at this moment?

ORION: Do I see it?

MATT: You guys haven't yet. At the moment, you're talking to this dwarf or you're shoving him off the platform.

ORION: Can I see it as I'm cruising through? I see him?

LAURA: We wanted to throw him as far as we could.

LIAM: Yes, the twins pull him up and one–

LIAM AND LAURA: Two, three!

MATT: (laughs) All right. As you chuck the duergar through the air, the creature who briefly had stopped, and you guys now see its motion stop, and you get a full view of its horrible form. (grunting, panting sounds)

ORION: As soon as I do that, I cast True Strike. (ftsssh)

MATT: All right, you cast True Strike on yourself?

ORION: On him!

MATT: On him?

ORION: What it does is, it allows me to see–keep going, I'll tell you. Go ahead.

MATT: All right, so it stops for a second. You guys all get a view of its vision. As it's looking up towards where Keyleth is, suddenly its head (shh) snaps back into focus as the duergar goes swinging through the air. As it does (snarling) it licks its lips and you can see now, where its mouth is, the lips curl back and the jaw splits open slightly with this horrible Predator-like fanged jaw, and the two tentacles that are currently up in the air reach out, grab, and (tshhh) just split it in two. Its torso then divides and sprays it with crimson as it (tongue flicking noise) licks it out of the air. (breathy growling)

LAURA: (whispering) Go faster. Go faster!

ORION: I'm still going! We're still going. I'm not standing and watching.

SAM: Have we passed it yet?

MATT: Everyone roll initiative.

LAURA: Oh my god, we're going to fight? We're going to fight this thing?

MARISHA: I was going to say we should try and avoid him. Poop monster.

LAURA: Oh, god.

SAM: No, we're floating above it. We've got advantage.

MARISHA: Do we?

LAURA: We're all stuck on a single piece of rock.

ORION: Yeah, well, that's the thing.

SAM: We're fine. One of us has guns.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: And we saw the duergar get pulled under by skeletal arms?

SAM: By the bones.

LIAM: Yeah, the bones pulled down, right? So it's not just this thing.

MATT: I'm using this as the figure for the creature.

ORION: By the way, Matthew.

MATT: Yes.

ORION: True Strike. I extend my hand and point a finger at a target. My magic grants me a brief insight into the target's defenses. On my next turn, I gain advantage on my first attack roll against the creature, using that spell as a guide.

MATT: Gotcha. So! For the purposes of this, the two gnomes are alongside Keyleth's eagle form.

TALIESIN: Oh, we're going to use the little thingy?

MARISHA: Yeah, are we going to use the levitating thingies?

MATT: What? Yes, we are. Let me pull them out right now over here.

TALIESIN: Levitating thingies!

MARISHA: Levitating thingies! Makes us look cool.

TALIESIN: It's been so long.

LAURA: Ooh, I like it.

MATT: There's the rest of you. Although, Trinket is a kitten.

SAM: Trinket is a cat.

TALIESIN: Trinket only has the power of “adorability.”

MATT: This is the stone slab over here that you guys have created. All right, so. Initiative rolls, everyone. Starting at… 25 to 20?

LAURA: 21.

MATT: All right. That puts Vex at the top of the round there. And brings– there we go. 20 to 15?

LIAM: 17.

ORION: 18.

MATT: 18? 15 to ten?

SAM: 12.

MATT: Ten to five?

MARISHA: Eight.

TALIESIN: Eight.

MATT: (laughs) Okay.

MARISHA: Team Eight.

TALIESIN: Boom.

MATT: Pike, what did you get?

ASHLEY: Four.

LAURA: Yay!

MATT: Okay, yay, Pike, bringing up the rear!

MARISHA: Team Single Digits!

ASHLEY: Team Single Digits!

TALIESIN: We'll get there.

MATT: Top of the round is the monstrosity. It is a very quick– move the camera. Follow me this way. There we go.

(all laugh)

MATT: It uses its quite grand movement of 50 feet to (shh) lumber over to this side, and it gets two attacks with its tentacles, with reach. Actually three attacks.

MARISHA: On who?

MATT: This is going to be at you guys.

LIAM: I don't need this foot.

MATT: This is going to be one at Kima, one at you and one at Tiberius as you are the three currently within its positioning view. First one is going to be at you.

LIAM: Okay.

MATT: Oh, that is going to be a 14 to hit?

LIAM: No.

MATT: All right, so you (whoosh) dodge out of the way. The one towards Kima. Oh that's going to be a 15 to hit, which it strikes her armor, but she manages to pull out of the way and it gleans off the side and you can see a little bit of this acid scarring across the edge of her leather armor. The third strike going out towards Tiberius (swoosh). That is (laughs) a critical one. It actually whips out and strikes the bottom of the stone you guys are standing on, which rocks it for a second, and you all essentially get worried but it seems to have no effect. That was a really terrible opening round for the creature.

MARISHA: Here's my question. Is this all happening still over top of the bone pit?

MATT: Oh yeah.

MARISHA: Okay.

MATT: That brings us to Vex.

LAURA: Hunter's Mark!

MATT: All right so you mark him

LAURA: Right on that guy.

MATT: Do it. He is Hunter's Marked and I'm putting this on here as a reminder of your mark.

LAURA: Okay.

TALIESIN: It's so fashionable.

MATT: Isn't it though.

LAURA: I'm going to lightning arrow him. Oh, I can't do that because I Hunter's Marked him.

MATT: Correct. that was your bonus action.

LAURA: I'm going to Hail of Thorns that guy.

MATT: All righty, thorn hail him.

LAURA: Okay, at level three.

MATT: Okay!

LAURA: Through my Bow of Blazing Bowstring.

MATT: Okay, so as you pull back your arrow, you pull it up, you can see the thorns (thoosh) actually grow rather rapidly out of the wood itself and as you pull back, the bowstring itself ignites setting the bow, the shaft of the arrow on fire as well as you release, rolling?

LAURA: 22.

MATT: 22 to hit?

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: That hits.

LAURA: Yes!

ASHLEY: Yeah.

LAURA: So then I roll my regular damage plus 3d10?

MATT: Correct, plus the fire damage which is 1d10.

LAURA: Okay, whoa. So 14 for the first.

MATT: Okay and then roll technically 4d10 because it's the fire.

LAURA: 4d10, this is crazy.

MATT: Yeah!

LAURA: Four, 11, 19. 21.

MATT: So 21 plus 14?

LAURA: Yes.

MATT: 35 points of damage. Nice. So you release (soosh).

LAURA: Oh plus Hunter's Mark damage!

MATT: Yep, there you go. That's why you did it.

LAURA: Six.

MATT: Nice, 41 points of damage in the first attack from the ranger.

MARISHA: (cheers)

MATT: All righty, so you release the arrow as the creature (woosh) shifts into place, it lashes out with all its tentacles and as it pulls back, looks like it's ready to pounce you release the arrow right towards its torso, it hits, and it looks down instinctually and it bursts into a spray of thorns all over its face and its torso and you can see it (monster screech) reels back from the pain, you can see the flames licking up over the front of its body. You can see there's a semblance of clothing on it. Whatever this thing once was, it's still wearing the clothing it had and a portion of it has burned off part of the torso. Whoever this poor soul once was, there is no shred of humanity left in it.

ORION: Before that ends I go, hop off.

LAURA: Hop off? No way. I'm not stepping on this bone shit.

LIAM: There's undead things in there

LAURA: That's my turn.

MATT: And that's your turn, and you're holding a kitten.

LAURA: Oh he's tucked into my armor.

MATT: Oh, he's tucked into you? Okay. That brings us to Tiberius, you're up. Tiberius, what are you doing.

LIAM: Tibber-hoods.

MATT: What you got?

ORION: Okay, everyone hold on tight.

SAM: You're giving us opposite notes.

MATT: What you got?

ORION: How wide was the stone tablet? Ten feet for all of us to fit on?

MATT: It's about 15 feet round.

ORION: Perfect, I move us right above the butthole and, everybody hold on. And I fucking slam all of us right on him. (boosh)

MATT: Okay. So the platform comes cascading down at a fair speed immediately breaking over this creature, as it is a pretty thin wall to have only been about 100 pounds. It completely shatters over the top of it. Everyone who was on that platform, go ahead and make a dexterity check.

ASHLEY: Get it, guys. Come on.

LAURA: I get two because it's favored terrain, right?

MATT: Correct.

LAURA: Yes, okay good.

MATT: All right so.

LIAM: 17.

LAURA: 23.

MATT: Oh, Pike's not there.

TALIESIN: 24.

ASHLEY: I'm not happening for a while.

ORION: Me too?

MATT: Yes.

ORION: 12.

MATT: 12. All right. So all the rest of you manage to leap off and tumble the best you can to catch yourself– except for Tiberius.

ORION: Wait, do I make a dexterity check? I mean I'm not– okay.

MATT: You do. You're still on the platform. It just shattered around you. So you however fall prone on the ground from the impact and land on the ground. That's also going to end your turn.

MARISHA: Did it do any damage?

ORION: Can I not do any bonus actions?

MATT: Unfortunately not, due to the failed dexterity save. It practically knocked the wind out of you due to the impact.

ORION: Okay.

MATT: That was the unfortunate part of missing that dexterity check.

ORION: Okay.

MATT: However, it does deal from the crushing damage to the entity that'll be I'll say 3d10 points of damage. I'll see if it makes its save to reduce to half. Which it does. Rolled a 21. What's your DC in your spell?

ORION: 17.

MATT: So it makes its save, so it's half damage. Roll 3d10 and it's half that.

ORION: (counting noises) What is that, 19.

MATT: Okay, so it takes a total of nine points of damage. Crushing damage from the blow of the stone on top of it. Nice. As it (crssh) shrugs off bits of chunks of stone that are around its body, you can see a little bit of blood is being pulled to the seams of its body. It's taken some hits. It's still doing all right but it's definitely– you can see it's not impervious by any means. That brings us to Vax.

LIAM: All right, well, I use my bonus action to click my Boots of Haste together.

MATT: Your Boot of Haste.

LIAM: Boot of Haste? But aren't magic items resistant to–

MATT: Oh yeah I was messing around.

LIAM: Okay, yeah. Start sneak attack from behind. 32 for the first attack.

MATT: You unfortunately do not get sneak attack on this. It knows where you are. You do not get the round before it– nobody else is adjacent to it because everyone else had to jump off the platform.

LIAM: So no one's right next to it? I'm the closest one?

MATT: Currently no. You are the closest one to it because everyone had to jump off as it fell, and the fact that as soon as you rush towards it, its head (cracking noise) clicked over its back and looked straight at you, almost the neck bending in the process.

LIAM: You block me every chance you get with this one. So that was the first attack…

MATT: No, this creature is really quick and very aware of its surroundings.

LIAM: So first attack is nine. There's more coming. Here comes the poison dagger, which is 23.

MATT: 23. That does hit.

LIAM: That is ten. Because of the Boots of Haste, I get a third attack.

MATT: You do.

LIAM: And that misses entirely. In fact, I think I threw my dagger into the bones.

MATT: What did you roll a one?

LIAM: A one, yeah.

MATT: Okay, so the first strike hits. The second one, you feel the poison energy pulse through the blade. What's the DC on that again?

LIAM: It's 15.

MATT: That hits. You feel the poison (crssh) enter its side, and it looks down– oh, it is immune to poison. Sorry. Oh, abyssal abominations! So the second blade goes in. The third one, you go ahead and swing towards it, and it (splssh) actually slaps the blade out of your hand and sticks to the ceiling. (whoosh) Thankfully, it returns back to your belt because magical belts are cool. All right, cool. That ends your turn. Kima's turn. Kima, who just managed to land, grabs her sword and reaches over. You can see the divine energy instilled within her blade. She is going to make two attacks against the creature. She rushes towards it on that side there. It's going to be yeah, 17. That'll hit. That's 27 to hit, and then a natural 20. So a hit and a critical. She's going to go ahead and get 15 damage from the first strike. Second one is going to be…

MARISHA: We need to get off this floor real bad.

SAM: Well you're not on it.

MARISHA: I'm not.

SAM: You can make a dance floor next to them.

MATT: All right, as she strikes it both times with the sword, you can see the first strike hits and the second one, she swings around and she instills with her Divine Smite, which does an additional eight points of divine damage. The second strike, as it slashes across, you can see the torso splits open. As the torso opens up, you can see a part of its guts spill out, and they begin to slowly pull themselves back in.

MARISHA: Hell no.

SAM: She's Wolverine!

MATT: (laughs) Scanlan you're up.

SAM: Okay. Do I have a clean line of sight on her? Or are we too far away?

MATT: You guys are up in the air being held by her. Probably actually I'd say…

MARISHA: I'm doing the eagle glide.

MATT: You guys are about 30 feet up right now.

LAURA: Oh man.

SAM: All right, so I think I'm in range. I'm just going to blind the bitch. So I cast Blindness on her.

MATT: Okay, what's the range on that?

LAURA: It's a girl?

ASHLEY: It's a her?

SAM: Isn't it a girl?

MATT: No it's a male elf.

SAM: Yeah, well I'm so demeaning to it, I call it a girl.

ASHLEY AND LAURA: Why is that demeaning?

SAM: Because it is a chauvinist. I know that.

MATT: What's the range on that, Scanlan?

SAM: I'm looking.

ASHLEY: Disadvantage on his roll!

LIAM: You're in the wrong group to being saying that shit, man.

(all laugh)

SAM: I'm drunk!

MARISHA: Whatever. (laughs)

SAM: How far am I? I can't even tell. I can't see the board.

MATT: You're about 70 feet.

SAM: I can't do it.

MATT: You can hold your turn if you want to wait for Keyleth to go.

SAM: I can hold my turn? I've never done this before.

MATT: Yeah. Meaning if you're waiting for someone else to take their turn first, you can hold back until they do theirs. So you can wait for her to pull you closer.

SAM: Okay. I will wait for that, then, and I love women.

ASHLEY: Oh, we know. We know.

SAM: Biblically.

MARISHA: Keyleth does a little dip really quick.

MATT: All right, gotcha.

MARISHA: Makes Scanlan a little nervous.

MATT: All right. Clarota takes his turn. Clarota is going to… the situation's too dangerous to do anything Lightning Bolt related. Clarota instead is going to use Mind Blast against the creature. No that's no good either, at this positioning– yeah no, because he'll get a bunch of you guys, too.

SAM: God, Clarota.

MARISHA: Clarota!

MATT: Instead Clarota is going to…

LAURA: Can he heal us?

MATT: No. Clarota's not really the healing kind. Clarota is going to cast Blur on himself to try and keep it from taking one of these points of wound damage. So he uses his turn to cast Blur. Clarota's form begins to shift and vibrate in and out of place where it's hard to see exactly where Clarota is standing. Clarota is going to take two steps back, unfortunately in the threat range of the creature. It gets (whoosh) a reaction to attack against Clarota. Thanks to the Blur spell, though, it misses entirely. So the strike strikes and it passes through with no effect. Clarota moves behind one of the rocks here, actually this far, for cover. That ends Clarota's turn. Keyleth, you're up.

MARISHA: Okay. I caw-caw closer

MATT: Like over where?

MARISHA: Yeah, there's good. Shit, can't cast any spells unless I land. I'm going to have to drop down. Can I perch on one of these stalactites?

MATT: You can, but you're going to have to let go of the gnomes to do so.

ASHLEY: Do it.

MARISHA: Can I drop off you guys?

ASHLEY: Yep.

MATT: You hear (bird noises).

SAM: What?

MARISHA: And I drop them off really quick.

ASHLEY: What did she say?

MATT: All right, so both of you guys make acrobatics checks. Disadvantage for you because of your armor.

ASHLEY: But don't I get a plus ten?

MATT: Not for acrobatics, you don't.

LIAM: Right. You're a bullet falling from the sky.

SAM: 16.

MATT: Okay.

ASHLEY: Eight.

MATT: All right. As both of you guys get released as you go to perch on these rocks.

MARISHA: I'm going to turn back into Keyleth holding onto the rock.

MATT: Okay. So we'll put you there. Keyleth, no longer an eagle. This is out of the way. You guys both land here and here.

MARISHA: But I'm still on the rock. I still want to be on the rock.

MATT: I'm considering you on the rock, but I don't want to have to try and balance you right there. Scanlan, you land, catch yourself on the bones, and you're fine. Pike, you sink into your waist at the impact.

ASHLEY: Because my armor's so heavy? (laughs)

MATT: Speed and the way your inability to catch your weight and use it. You just go (schoomp). Just stick directly into the bone up to your waist.

LIAM: You're gnomic lawn art.

ASHLEY: Aw, dang it!

MATT: Percy you're up!

MARISHA: Wait, I'm not done!

MATT: Right. Sorry, you turn back. So Keyleth, what are you doing?

MARISHA: The laser pointer's dead. Now I'm going to make a wall of stone. Wait, is there someone in the way? Is there somebody behind him? Is that Vax?

LIAM AND MATT: Yeah.

MARISHA: Damn it, Vax!

SAM: He didn't ask to be dropped there.

LAURA: That's where we landed.

MARISHA: Shitballs. All right. I'm going to do Grasping Vine, then. No, I should make us a dance floor. I'm going to make us a dance floor, then. I'm going to do a wall of stone. How concentrated can I do my wall of stone, actually? Can I do a wall of stone to where it's doughnut-shaped? Where there's a hole in the middle? And now I make a wall going across the top?

TALIESIN: A doughnut of stone.

MATT: I would say, based on the description of it here…

MARISHA: A horizontal wall?

MATT: Ten foot by ten foot panels.

SAM: Panels. Squares.

MATT: Alternatively, you can create ten foot by 20 foot panels that are only three inches thick. So yes, you can, you can create any shape you desire, so you can make it a doughnut hole type thing if you want to.

MARISHA: Dope. So, I'm going to make a doughnut-shaped dance floor, and I'm going to make a hole in the middle to where he's still in the middle in the bone, but we're all on rock. Around this area.

MATT: So, it's just around all of you guys or underneath everybody?

MARISHA: Underneath us.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: I'm making a dance floor.

SAM: That was an excellent move by a strong, independent woman who doesn't need a man to tell her what to do. Or to validate her in any way.

MARISHA: I want everybody–

MATT: You might not be able to get Pike.

MARISHA: I can't get Pike?

MATT: No, because there would be a weird loop there.

ASHLEY: I can maybe try to Sprinter's Boots my way up.

MARISHA: Well, as much as I can do, but I want to make a nice hole to where he's still–

MATT: I would say you can either get Pike or you can get these guys here. That's about where you're going to call it.

ASHLEY: No worries. Do some damage!

MATT: What are you going to do?

MARISHA: I'm going to boost up Pike. She's halfway underground.

MATT: The wall comes out and it stops there. That's as far as you can get it. This whole area now is a wall. It pops you out of the stone as the stone lifts you up. You have to catch yourself for a second, but it's not so abrupt to the point where you get knocked off the side. You're all lifted up about ten feet. So just mark that area as stone wall. Got it.

MARISHA: Except for douchebag.

MATT: Except for douchebag.

SAM: Now that I'm within range, may I go?

MATT: After Percy, and then it's your turn. You all get to hold at the same time, so. Percy.

TALIESIN: Does he get an attack of opportunity if I run?

MATT: You don't know.

TALIESIN: How close am I? I can't see.

MATT: It took one reaction against Clarota.

LIAM: You're further than five feet away, because had you been five feet away I could have sneak attacked.

TALIESIN: Oh. Well, all right. The first thing I'm going to do is shoot twice in the face of this asshole.

MATT: Okay. Go for it.

MARISHA: Shoot twice into the face of the asshole, Percy.

TALIESIN: 14?

MATT: 14 does not hit, unfortunately.

TALIESIN: But 28 will.

MATT: 28 will. So the first shot, you shoot, the body just goes (sound of air splitting speed) and totally unnatural sense sees where the aim is and is already out of the way before the bullet gets there. Returns, but you catch it up with the second shot from the Pepperbox, and blast in the side of its chest. Go ahead and roll damage.

TALIESIN: Oh my god. This is awful. Six.

MATT: Six points of damage. All righty.

TALIESIN: That's just embarrassing.

LAURA: That's something, that's something, Percy!

ASHLEY: Hey, you know what? We're getting close!

LAURA: That's better than a one.

MARISHA: Pike is just an inspirational poster today. Like, it's okay, we can do it!

TALIESIN: Thanks, mom. All right. Thanks, mom. I'm going to try to make a run for it to the stalactite by your hand.

MATT: Right here?

TALIESIN: If I could even climb up on it, that would be very cool.

MATT: That's going to, with your run speed, you're going to have to do that next turn.

TALIESIN: Okay, that's fine.

MATT: You don't have enough action to do that, but you get to it. Scanlan, you're up!

SAM: I'm going to blind him. With Blindness in his eyes.

TALIESIN: Try blinding him with science, that usually works.

MATT: Are you using your hand cone?

SAM: I am using my hand cone.

MATT: I assume you do, for the most part. So what's your DC with that?

SAM: 19.

MATT: Good. All right, fails its roll.

ORION AND ASHLEY: Yes!

MATT: As you release the arcane essence, you can see this darkness spill up and completely cascade over the white, almost soulless, freaking out eyes of this creature. It's very Silent Hill in the way it moves. Suddenly, its eyes (shhh noise) fill over with darkness, and you can see it beginning to writhe and move around like it's unable to truly grasp the full surroundings. It appears to have taken effect.

ORION: Nice!

SAM: And then I give a little inspiration to Pike. I look over to her, give her a little wink, little smile…

LIAM: Spirit her on with anger. Good job.

MATT: Take your 1d8 inspiration.

ASHLEY: 1d8? Okay.

SAM: That's all it takes.

MARISHA: That's all it takes. (laughs)

MATT: All right. That ends your turn, Scanlan?

SAM: I think so.

MATT: You're going to stay right there?

SAM: Where am I?

MATT: You're on top of the wall, right here.

SAM: Yeah, I'm staying on that wall, yeah. I don't want to go anywhere, yeah.

MATT: Okay. Pike, you're up.

ASHLEY: Okay. So, from where I'm at–

MATT: Yes, on top of this wall here.

ASHLEY: I'm on top of a wall? I'm going to Guiding Bolt the whatever-it-is.

(all laugh)

SAM: The whatever it is.

ASHLEY: And then– okay, wait, hold on. Let me cast that at– So what do I roll for?

MATT: You roll and add your spell attack modifier to it, I believe it is, to hit for Guiding Bolt.

ASHLEY: So I roll the d20 to see if I hit?

MATT: I'm pretty sure, yeah. It should be in the description.

ASHLEY: Okay.

LAURA: That's good, that's good!

ASHLEY: 15.

LAURA: Plus anything?

ASHLEY: Oh, plus– wait, what am I plussing? I'm so sorry!

MATT: Your spell attack.

LAURA: It's on your spell page.

MATT: It's on your spell page, top of your spell page.

ASHLEY: Okay.

MATT: You haven't used it in a while. Yeah.

ASHLEY: 23.

MATT: 23 does hit!

ASHLEY: Yes!

ASHLEY: Okay, so then we do–

MATT: 4d6 points of radiant damage to it.

SAM: It's also blind.

MATT: Yes.

ASHLEY: 15? And I'm going to add my inspiration from him.

MATT: You can't add that to damage. It's only to hit.

SAM: Save it for later.

ASHLEY: So, 19.

MATT: 19. So, as you look down, you grab your holy symbol, and even though it is cracked, you still feel the presence of Sarenrae looking down upon you. The divine energy coalesces in your hand, and you throw it forward with a divine wrath as it streaks across the air. It slams into the side of this weird twisting abomination, and as it blasts into it you can see its tentacles reel back and pull back in severe pain and it roars this horrible, screeching (bleeegrh screech) scream into the cavern around you, echoing down the hall. It's looking a little rough.

ASHLEY: Okay. And then there's nothing I can do from there, right?

MATT: That's your action. You can move if you'd like. Move along the wall, or hop off it, or whatever you want to do.

SAM: Come closer to me!

ASHLEY: I'll stay!

(all laugh)

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: Because she's an independent woman.

SAM: That's a proud choice, and I honor and respect it. I love women!

MATT: So currently, because it's–

MARISHA: Pike's not the only one cashing karma points.

MATT: So technically, I should have remembered this, but you hit anyway: while it's blinded, attacks against it have advantage.

LAURA: Oh, okay.

MATT: And its attacks have disadvantage. So, as a note. Top of the round, now, the monstrosity goes ahead and gets its round. It's going to go ahead and lash outward. Thinks people are around it, seeing the wall go up, it's going to swing out towards you. All right, that is a 16 versus armor class. Nice! So, as it swings out towards you on the wall, you duck out of the way just in time. A second tendril (whoosh, swish) reaches out and is going ahead and head forward… let's see. This one's probably going to make its way either between your foot or Scanlan on the wall. I'm going to roll to see who it goes for. Goes for Tiberius. That is 16 versus armor class again.

ORION: No. 17.

MATT: 17? Nice! Let's see…

LAURA: On the ground, you look up like…

ORION: No! My big toe! Bah!

MATT: Third strike is going to whip around and attempt to grab… roll between both… Okay, it's going to go for Lady Kima. And that's a natural 20.

LAURA: Oh.

TALIESIN: She's a magnet.

MARISHA: Even with disadvantage?

MATT: Well, actually, no, technically it would've still been a 15, so it's not a critical, but it still hits.

MARISHA: That's good.

MATT: Unfortunately, without her full armor, her AC is not that crazy. So it's not a critical. That's nice. That brings it to a total of 18 points of damage with an additional six acid damage to Lady Kima.

LAURA: Oh. Acid. None of us have gotten hit yet.

MATT: And the tentacle (whoosh) wraps around her and grapples her in place, and she's currently held in place by its tentacle. She stays where she is. It is now going to attempt to leap away. It brings all of its tentacles to the ground and (whoosh) leaps up into the air.

LIAM: Attacking before it goes.

MATT: You get one attack of opportunity against it.

LIAM: 27.

MATT: 27 does hit.

ORION: I swing at it with my cane as I'm on the floor.

MATT: No.

SAM: Do I get an attack?

LIAM: 11.

MATT: 11 points of damage? All right. It takes 11, and it leaps away, (whoosh) taking her with it, and here, it's actually going to land about there, and you can see as it leaps away and lands, the wounds you guys have left on it are slowly healing.

MARISHA: Son of a bitch!

MATT: Vex, you're up.

LAURA: All right. I don't want to hit Lady Kima with any of my attacks, so I'm just going to have to do… I'm going to do the Blazing Bowstring again.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: And I'm going to attack it twice.

MATT: All right. Go for it. Roll for strikes.

LAURA: Ooh! That was a 30!

MATT: You have advantage on these strikes, by the way. Well, actually, let me see, because I think it gets a save each turn to try to get rid of your blindness, which it does not make.

ORION: Nice. Is he blind?

MATT: Okay. So still blinded.

LAURA: 29.

MATT: Hits. Definitely.

LAURA: And 23.

MATT: Both hit. Go ahead and roll damage on both attacks. First one with the extra d10 for Blazing Bowstring. This arrow: once again, you pull out, burst into flame (whoosh). The heat is a bit strong for your face, but you release it forward; it actually impacts into your damage. Streaks across with an arc of fire, and slamming into its side, dealing?

LAURA: 14 points of damage on the first one.

MATT: All right. Second one?

LAURA: (laughs) What did I do on that? That was weird. 14 on the second one as well.

MATT: Nice! All right.

ASHLEY: And can I cast War God's Blessing on her and give her a plus ten? For an attack roll?

MATT: She's already attacked, but to other people, you can. And you can do it after they roll. If somebody rolls and you're like, that's a really bad roll, you can be like, plus ten! and it might give them enough to push them over the edge. It's not for damage.

ASHLEY: It's not for damage. It's for–

MATT: Attacking, to make sure you hit them.

ASHLEY: I understand. Okay, great.

LAURA: But with Hunter's Mark– she's still Hunter's Marked!

MATT: Correct. Oh, did you not roll that damage?

LAURA: Four.

MATT: All right. Extra four damage from the Hunter's Mark. Tiberius.

ORION: Yes.

MATT: So, do you get up? You're currently lying on the top of the wall.

ORION: I look around, and I don't like what I see, and I try to get up.

MATT: Okay. You (grunts) stand back up. You're currently at the top of the wall; it's ten feet up.

ORION: Really? Okay, where's he again? All I see is mountains. Oh, I see, you put the yellow ring around him? And Kima's to the right of him?

LAURA: Kima's being held by him.

ORION: Oh, okay. Great. I look at him, see what's going on. I (ping) my Ioun Stone, and I conjure out Telekinesis from it, and I guide it towards the monster's tentacle to unwrap it off Kima, and I attempt to pull it off her.

MATT: Go ahead and make an arcana check.

LIAM: That's Telekinesis, Kyle!

(all laugh)

ORION: Sweet! 20.

MATT: 20? All right. As you focus your Telekinesis, the tentacle begins to shake and is pulled off her body. Kima wrenches herself free. She is not currently grappled.

ORION: Can I also go like, (bash) Stop hitting yourself!

(all laugh)

MATT: The tentacle starts slapping around its body, and it looks confused. It's not enough to do any damage, but it looks unsure as to why it's having a hard time controlling its own limbs.

ORION: I give a nod to Kima.

MATT: (laughs) Well done.

ORION: That's my turn.

MATT: All right, cool. Vax, you're up.

LIAM: I'm still hasted, so I'm going to use a bonus action to go stealth.

MATT: All right. It can't see you, by the way.

LIAM: What?

MATT: It's blinded.

LIAM: Oh, it's blinded? But do I still need that to sneak attack, though? Or does it matter? Never mind. I'm running at it, and since Kima's right there, I'm going to stab the bejesus out of it.

MATT: Go for it!

LIAM: I'm going to use Luck on that roll.

MATT: Okay. Well, you have advantage, remember, because it's blinded.

LIAM: Okay, great. So that is a 29.

MATT: 29 hits.

LIAM: Okay.

(incoherent mumbling)

LIAM: Which part gets doubled? I always forget.

MATT: It's the dice.

LIAM: So 19 goes to 38, and then the damage gets added to that, right?

MATT: Correct.

LIAM: With the sneak attack, and the damage gets doubled–

MATT: Correct, and then the bonus at the end gets added on to that.

LIAM: The bonus at the end. Okay, all right. So what that is is 47.

MATT: 47 points of damage. Oof. So as you rush past, you (swoosh) slam the blade into the side. You see where part of it seems to start and open, but it's starting to close up again. You reopen that seam and drag across, leaving a giant wound across its side.

LIAM: Okay, and then with that knife in, I'm going to stick the other knife in and attempt to attack it and then drag it to the ground. Grapple it to the ground with my body as I attack. Second attack is a 25.

MATT: 25 hits.

LIAM: Okay. That's seven.

MATT: Are you doing damage, or you grappling him?

LIAM: I'll grapple.

MATT: Okay, so there's no damage on this. Go ahead and make an athletics check.

LIAM: Okay. 20. Natural 20.

(all cheer)

MATT: Nice! So you grab it, and you pull it. You have it currently held. Its physical body is pulled to the ground, and you can see its arms are trying to pull it up off the ground, and (slurpy noises) flipping around. Complete chaos in the air. You imagine you'll probably have a hard time holding it down, but for now it's currently blinded and grappled.

LIAM: With haste, I have a third attack.

MATT: You do.

LIAM: I'm going to drag across its throat. That is a 25.

MATT: That hits.

LIAM: And that's seven.

MATT: You don't get the bonus– oh, for the extra attack you do, because it's with your main arm. So, seven damage? All right. Cool. You bring the blade across, and you can see the blood begin to pour out from it, and as it does, you can see the throat opens up, and where you cut on the throat you can see what looks like white gleaming teeth on the inside of its throat. The entire interior of its trachea is coated with teeth.

ALL: (noises of disgust)

SAM: It has a maw?

MATT: Kima's turn. Kima sees you holding it down. Takes the sword, swings it, and is going to come on down, spending a level-three spell as a Divine Smite against it. That hits with a 22. This advantage is kicking its ass. Second attack.

LAURA: Nice Blind, Scanlan.

MATT: Oof. Yeah. Both hit. All right. 36 points of damage, and a divine strike. And 12 points on the second blow. As she comes down and slams it with the big sword twice, the first one arcing down with divine energy, streaking across the barely-lit cavernous area. It hits the ground, and it splatters blood across. You can see one of its tentacles is barely hanging on by just a section of muscle and sinew. However, she looks down real fast, and you can see now these skeletal hands are reaching up and grabbing her legs and starting to pull her down. She's going to attempt to try–

ORION: Kima?

MATT AND LAURA: Kima.

LAURA: Oh, I wonder if that's going to happen to all of us.

MATT: She's unable to break from that. She's now being pulled down into the ground beneath her. That brings us to Clarota's turn. Clarota is going to move–

MARISHA: Who all is on the dance floor?

MATT: Ugh, can't do this.

LAURA: All of us except for Percy, I think.

MATT: Clarota's going to stand here and pull back and begin to coalesce this bluish crackling energy in Clarota's hand. The tentacles of Clarota's face begin to swirl and pull back into this horrible grimace as it releases this bolt of lighting energy that arcs past, just overhead of where Kima is, since Kima's been pulled down below. Lightning Bolt. Two ones in a row, are you fucking kidding me? I'm rolling terribly tonight, guys, by the way.

LIAM: It's mostly in our favor.

MATT: Yeah. So that Lightning Bolt would do 15 points of damage. With disadvantage on its save. Still makes it, so (laughs) with a Lightning Bolt that does a grand total of seven points of damage–

LAURA: It's better than one, Clarota! It's better than one!

MATT: Clarota looks away dejectedly. “It was the best I could do.” All right. Keyleth, you're up.

MARISHA: All right. Seeing Lady Kima slowly getting taken under, I make eye contact with her.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: What?

MATT: No, continue.

MARISHA: Okay. And I make a Grasping Vine from that stalactite over there.

MATT: Here?

MARISHA: Yes. And I'm going to take it and wrap it around Lady Kima and try to yank her out.

MATT: Okay. All right. So as the vine pulls out of the side of this rock (whoosh), it reaches out and wraps itself around her body and begins to pull.

MARISHA: Around her waist. Not her neck, again.

MATT: Right.

MARISHA: Yeah.

(all laugh)

MATT: Good distinction. All right.

MARISHA: Just wanting that out there.

MATT: Yeah. It's a good thing. So, Grasping Vine… yeah, okay. So it pulls 20 feet; she gets pulled 20 feet. I'll go ahead and say, make a wisdom check.

MARISHA: I'm trying not to hurt her.

MATT: Right, I understand. This is more your strength of will versus the strength of whatever–

MARISHA: Just adding my wisdom?

MATT: Yep.

MARISHA: 20. Total.

MATT: 20. So, as the vine wraps around her and begins to pull, she reaches over and grabs the vine for extra strength, and (fwoomp) it pulls her out of the wall. She goes flying over and lands at the side of the stone with a vine that's still loosely wrapped around her, but it's definitely pulled her free of the floor.

MARISHA: Can I leave it to where it's holding her up, to where it's not touching?

MATT: Sure! Yeah. She's currently held aloft by this vine that strapped her. She's looking confused. Thankful, but also wants to be let go.

MARISHA: Can I take a bonus action to shout at her? Be like, “Calm down Kima! Jeez!”

MATT: Sure. Is that the end of your turn?

MARISHA: Yes!

MATT: Okay! As you finish casting the spell and shouting at her, you look down and notice the ground. (swish, shoosh) Begins pulling you down

MARISHA: No, I'm still on the stalactites. I haven't moved off the stalactite! I'm straddling it.

ASHLEY: A little straddle action!

MARISHA: I'm riding that stalactite

MATT: Go ahead.

MARISHA: Riding it side-saddle.

MATT: It's really hard to be on top of that and cast spells and talk about this. (chuckling) It's a giant piece. I'm going to say, go ahead and make an athletics check.

MARISHA: All right. Ooh! 24.

MATT: Okay! You manage to precariously stay on the top of this stalactite, holding on to it, casting spells and shouting out. All right.

MARISHA: Jeez, Kima! Stop! This is hard already!

MATT: Percy!

TALIESIN: I'm going to crawl and find myself a seat on top of that stalactite. That's my first thing I'm going to do.

MATT: Okay, well, at the start of your turn, make a dexterity check.

TALIESIN: 20!

MATT: All right. You manage to pull out. Now make an athletics check to try and make your way up to the top of this rock.

TALIESIN: Athletics or acrobatics?

MATT: This would be athletics, just to pull yourself up on the side.

MARISHA: Rock climbing check.

TALIESIN: 13.

MATT: 13. Okay! You can decide whether or not you want to attempt to ascend this or make any attacks this turn, because right now it's going to take your full round to get to the top of this. It's a very thin, jagged, almost vertical wall you're trying to climb up and hold onto.

TALIESIN: How far away am I from the stones? From the platform?

MATT: From the platform here?

TALIESIN: From something I can stand on that's not sand.

MATT: You're probably about 35 feet.

TALIESIN: So I could make it in a run?

MATT: You could make it in a run, yeah.

TALIESIN: All right. I mean, in a standard movement action?

MATT: No. You'd almost make it.

ORION: What's your movement?

TALIESIN: My movement is 30. Just almost make it?

MATT: Yeah. Right now, this wall's blocking you from even seeing the creature. As far as you know, you see a giant wall and you hear fighting on the other side of it.

TALIESIN: I'll make it to the top of the stalactite, then.

MATT: Okay, so. (grunts) You get up to the top. I'll put this here as a reminder. But that's where you are right now. Okay, that ends your turn. Scanlan!

SAM: Is there anywhere I can stay on the dance floor and get a line of sight with the creature?

MATT: I'll say you'll be able to get right up next to Tiberius, right here, and be able to get line of sight.

SAM: And can I throw lightning and not hit Tiberius?

MATT: No.

SAM: (nervous laugh) Okay, then. Then I don't do that. Instead, I will– I've got nothing to do! Let's say I will try to– is she– it's a he.

MATT: It's a he.

TALIESIN: It's a he! God!

SAM: I have no ranged attacks. Except I can Viciously Mock it, so that's what I'll do. I'll say, you know what? Your tentacles make you look kind of fat, and the elf thing is played out. It's sort of 1990s. Orlando Bloom. And the whole bone thing is just really tacky!

ORION: I look at Scanlan curiously. (laughs)

MATT: Tiberius looks over. You look over your shoulder at Scanlan with a curious look. Rolled a four. So essentially, being blind, all it can rely on right now is audio sensation around it. And it picks up ringing through the air. What hint and shred of humanity is within its psyche understands the Common you speak in its direction. And for a moment, it seems to sag all its tentacles. Go ahead and roll damage for your Vicious Mockery.

SAM: Three! Yes! It's the only ranged attack I have.

(all laugh)

MATT: I was just seeing if there's another effect of Vicious Mockery.

ORION: He's sad for a while. (laughs)

MATT: Is there anything else it does?

ASHLEY: He's dead!

MARISHA: Yeah, he just dies!

ORION: Negative two to self-esteem.

MATT: Vicious Mockery– has disadvantage on– okay! So it has disadvantage on disadvantage on its next attack. Got it!

TALIESIN: Does that mean it has triple?

MATT: Nah. If it did, that would be awesome. Pike, you're up!

SAM: Oh! And as my bonus action, I'm going to inspire somebody. I don't know. Who? I look over at Liam and I do– sorry, Vax. And I do one of these.

(all laugh)

MATT: All right. You are strangely inspired by that.

LIAM: I giggle-snort.

MATT: Okay. That brings us to Pike. You're up.

ASHLEY: Okay, so where are we at? I'm so sorry. I can't see.

MATT: You're right there, on top of the wall, on the far back end. You can't even see the entity. It's way off to the side and a bunch of people are in a row on top of a wall that Keyleth created.

ASHLEY: Okay, so I'm going to use my Sprinter's Boots and get over. Everybody's healed; everybody hasn't really taken too many hit points?

MATT: You've guys rolled really well and it has rolled terribly.

ASHLEY: So I'm going to go around here. Oh, I don't know, can I have–

MATT: It's a very thin wall. Make an acrobatics check to try and move and tumble through the people. With disadvantage because you're in heavy plate armor.

SAM: But you've got inspiration.

MATT: You do.

LIAM: You can add that to your roll. So add inspiration.

MATT: Roll twice. You're at disadvantage.

LAURA: 13.

ASHLEY: What, plus eight?

SAM: You can roll a d8.

LIAM: It's advantage, so pick the higher.

MATT: No, disadvantage, because she's in heavy armor.

LIAM: Oh oh oh.

ASHLEY: 16.

MATT: 16? You just manage to barely squeeze through people without falling off of the top of the wall, finding yourself right there.

ASHLEY: Okay. So then, since I'm there, I'm going to cast Guiding Bolt again.

MATT: Okay.

ASHLEY: And then I'm going to cast it at 4th level again. And then, which is–

MATT: Roll to attack twice. You have to roll to hit it first. Roll twice, because it is blinded and has disadvantage. You have advantage on it, I mean.

ASHLEY: 18.

LAURA: Plus your spell thing?

MATT: 18 plus your spell.

ASHLEY: Oh, which would be 26.

MATT: That does hits. Go ahead and roll damage. You are at 4th level, that is 7d6 damage.

ORION: Nice! Holy crap.

SAM: Pike, perhaps you should spare it for your god, or offer it in sacrifice to your god?

ASHLEY: Sorry, guys.

TALIESIN: That's a lot of math.

SAM: You know what? Women are good at math.

ORION: They are.

TALIESIN: They are.

SAM: Probably better than men.

ORION: I would say probably.

ASHLEY: And then do I add anything?

MATT: No, that's just the 7d6.

ASHLEY: 26.

MATT: 26 damage, nice!

SAM: Good adding.

ASHLEY: Hey, thanks!

MATT: As you pull through the rest of the crowd, you stand next to someone, you grab your holy symbol again. This time, looking up to your hand. This divine energy materializes and shines down in a god ray onto your hand as you gather it with your fingers, it seems to formulate this actual thick rock feeling sensation. You swing it underhand softball pitch with absolute furious anger that slams into the side of the creature, bursting with the divine energy, doing a very sincerely impressive amount of damage for a small Guiding Bolt. It's currently still trying to get back up after Vax has been holding it to the ground. You can see it blast its side. You are almost pulled over on top of it by the sheer force of the impact.

ASHLEY: Sorry, Vax!

MATT: That brings us to the top of it now.

SAM: It's still alive?

ASHLEY: It's still alive?!

LIAM: It's got that healing factor.

SAM: Can we undo its healing factor?

MATT: After all the impact, all the sounds it's hearing, it moves over to this vicinity.

LIAM: Ain't he grappled?

MATT: Oh, you're holding it here.

LIAM: I'm holding it.

MATT: It's going to attempt to break from your grapple.

LIAM: Good luck.

MATT: So you make an acrobatics check.

LIAM: Do I get advantage on this?

MATT: For this check, you do, I believe.

LIAM: Okay, good. 27.

MATT: 27? 29. It slips out of your grasp, moves over to this vicinity here. And you can see now, the tendrils open up, even though its eyes can't see. You can see what looks like a bunch of gills across its body, slits in its torso and it almost looks like all of them open up into these tiny little mouths. You can also see teeth rippling through them and expels this cloud of green gas that (fssh) around everyone within ten feet of it. Everyone on the wall, right here. Clarota– you are just out of range of it– and Kima are affected. So that would be Pike, Vex, Trinket, technically. Clarota. So I need you guys to make a constitution saving throw.

MARISHA: What?

SAM: (garbled) Make a constitution saving throw.

MATT: Pike? Whenever she comes back.

SAM: Who has to do this? Pike, Clarota?

MATT: Pike, Clarota, Trinket, Vex.

LAURA: Should I roll for Pike?

MATT: Wait until she gets back. What did you roll?

LAURA: 19. Oh, 19 and then for Trinket– oh no.

MATT: Clarota does not make it. Kima does not make it.

SAM: I can roll for Pike.

MATT: All right, go for it.

LAURA: No!

SAM: I've got this, guys. We're connected in a special gnome way that you have no idea how pure this bond is.

LIAM: Here comes the one.

SAM: 16, plus whatever.

LAURA: Oh, plus her– wait, I'm looking up her constitution. Plus one. 17.

MATT: All right. Trinket rolled a…?

LAURA: Seven.

SAM: (singing) And that's the power of love!

LAURA: But I rolled a 19.

MATT: Right, as this cloud of greenish gas bursts out from all these strange slits in its body, you feel this acidic fume fill your lungs and touch your skin. You manage to duck out of the way and resist a lot of the damage, as does Pike, pulling up her cloak in front of the way. You guys take 14 points of acid damage. However, Clarota and Kima and Trinket all take 28 points of acid damage.

LAURA: (gasps) 28 points?!

MATT: Yes.

SAM: For Trinket?

MATT: Yep.

SAM: Is Trinket still a cat?

MATT: Trinket's kitten form is taken away as the Polymorph wears off–

LAURA: Oh, shit. Boom!

MATT: (boosh) This bear bursts out from your chest.

SAM: Oh, no, your shirt is ripped.

LAURA: All of a sudden, my bosom comes flying out.

MATT: So Trinket's at full health again. Hold on, the kitten form, I'm going to say, would have about five hit points, so taking five from 28… Trinket has taken 23 points of damage.

SAM: Pike, you just took 14.

MATT: 14 points of acid poison damage, as this entity vented its torso into this giant fume of acidic gas.

SAM: It would have been much more if Scanlan hadn't been around, that's all I'm saying.

ASHLEY: Oh, wow. Okay.

MATT: At which Trinket bursts out of Vex's torso, landing into the bones below. (growls)

LAURA: No, in the bones?

MATT: Yeah, because on the wall (fwoosh) out in front of you.

TALIESIN: Now we know how many hit points it takes to kill a kitten. That will actually be useful. Five. Five hit points.

LAURA: Five hit points. That's good.

TALIESIN: Five hit points, everyone.

MATT: All right. It's going to finish its turn. That brings us to Vex.

LAURA: That's me!

MATT: Yep.

LAURA: Is there anything– what's nearby? Is anything within five feet of it?

MATT: Oh, actually, I should see if it– it does resist. It is no longer blinded.

SAM: Oh, snap.

MATT: You can see the darkness fades from its eyes and the whiteness bursts from its face. It's intent now, as each eye individually darts around and takes reference of all the points of possible attack that are now before it.

MARISHA: Wait, its blindness wore off? Oh, poop.

LAURA: Is anything within five feet of it?

MATT: Trinket is.

LAURA: Trinket's going to be affected. Oh! I command Trinket to move, then. Can he?

MATT: Okay. Trinket can, yeah, if you want.

LAURA: Can he try to climb up and get away from it? Oh, no. He'll take a hit, won't he.

MATT: He will.

LAURA: Do it.

LIAM: If it hits. It could miss.

LAURA: Oh god, but he's so low on health.

ASHLEY: Where's he at?

LAURA: He's right next to it! Get up, Trinket, get up on the wall. And I'm going to cast Hail of Thorns on the thing.

MATT: What's the radius on Hail of Thorns?

LAURA: Five feet.

MATT: Five feet. Okay. Trinket is going to attempt to get up the wall. Make an athletics check for Trinket, (laughs) who's going to try and climb a ten-foot solid stone wall, which is–

TALIESIN: Bears can climb trees.

MATT: Trees, yes. Solid, smooth stone walls? Little more of… but–

LAURA: What is it, is it an acrobatics?

MATT: It's going to be athletics for Trinket.

LAURA: Athletics. I don't know what to add, but it's 19 plus whatever. Strength?

MATT: 19 plus strength.

LAURA: 23.

MATT: Okay, Trinket scrambles up the side of the wall. As it does, one of the white eyes is looking around like an iguana (tchh) focuses on Trinket, (whoosh) goes to whip toward Trinket. That is going to be a 24 versus his armor class.

LAURA: Oh, it hits!

MATT: Trinket takes 17 points of damage.

LAURA: Oh no!

MATT: Plus an additional five points of acid damage.

LAURA: Trinket's unconscious!

MATT: As Trinket climbs up the wall, (shh, groan) and then streaks and falls back down onto the bone, unconscious.

SAM: Bear down!

ASHLEY: We'll heal him!

LAURA: Oh, no! He's lying in the skeletons.

MATT: So you're now there up top. What are you going to do? You watched Trinket fall and hit the ground.

ASHLEY: Kill him!

SAM: Not Trinket.

LAURA: Do I get to– can I move if I attack, or is that it?

MATT: You gave Trinket your move on this turn, so you can still attack from where you are.

ASHLEY: Attack him!

LAURA: Will somebody save Trinket?

MARISHA: I'll save Trinket.

LAURA: Okay, then I still attack him. But wait, will I do damage to Trinket, then, still on the ground, unconscious?

MATT: What are you doing?

LAURA: Well, I was going to do Hail of Thorns, but I shouldn't because he's within five feet?

MATT: Within five feet.

LIAM: You could do a regular arrow.

LAURA: All right, I do a regular flaming arrow.

MATT: You've used your flaming arrow twice.

LAURA: No, I only used it once.

MATT: No, you used it at the top of the round, too.

LAURA: Shitballs. Okay, then I'm– I have regular arrows. I'm going to use Bloodseeking Bow, then.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Oh god. I'm freaking out.

MATT: Make your bloodseeking strike, now, with the fury and anger and frustration–

LAURA: 26.

MATT: Hits.

LAURA: Okay.

ASHLEY: Roll for damage.

LAURA: 11, plus Hunter's Mark. 15. And then the Bloodseeking Bow does ten bleeding damage each round.

MATT: Nice. Okay, when we get back to its turn, it'll have ten bleeding damage on it. You have your second attack, too.

LAURA: Okay. 24.

MATT: 24 hits.

LAURA: That's 12. 13.

MATT: Okay. So both arrows (zoomf zoomf) sink down. You can see your jaw's tense and you can feel the tear running down your face, but you are intent on taking this son of a bitch down. That brings us to Tiberius. Actually, at the end of your turn, go ahead and make a death saving throw. For Trinket.

LAURA: Oh god.

SAM: Death saving throw?!

LIAM: Three successes or three fails. That's first fail.

ASHLEY: Wait, what? No. I can add a plus ten, right?

MATT: To a death saving throw?

LAURA: Not so much.

MATT: It has to be attacks for you, unfortunately. So that's one death saving throw on Trinket. Tiberius, what are you doing?

SAM: This is a grizzly situation!

ORION: Okay. I assess the situation, and I don't like it.

SAM: The end.

ORION: No. I cast Watery Sphere on him, and try to capture the guy in my sphere. That is– oh, plus this! (gasps) Oh my god, I always forget it's that number. It's 27.

MATT: 27? All right.

ORION: 18 plus nine?

MATT: I'm just trying to get familiar with this one real fast, guys.

MARISHA: So he uses his spell attack bonus, I'm assuming?

MATT: Watery Sphere, you said?

ORION: Yeah. I was looking that up, too.

MATT: Watery Sphere. Got it here. Okay. Over the edge, and ten feet– okay, it's not an attack roll for you. It has to make a strength saving throw. Saving throw. That is a 21. What's the DC for your spell?

ORION: 17.

MATT: Okay. So yeah. The sphere appears. The creature is ejected from the side right there. So the sphere is still there, but the creature is un-grabbed by it.

ORION: Does it do damage?

MATT: As far as I know, it just grabs.

ORION: Ugh. All right. That's my bad, I shouldn't have–

MATT: It restrains and grabs things inside when it has them. It works more as control than as a damaging spell, but the sphere is still there.

ORION: Well, fine. I can still move it, yes?

LAURA: Can you pick Trinket up and bring him up on the wall?

ORION: She's got this. I'll move it over just to make him all soak-y in it anyway. It's not going to– I can't move him. It doesn't control him, right?

MATT: No, not if he makes the save. If he fails the save, then yes, you have them trapped in the sphere, but currently basically (sploosh) pushed his way out of it.

ORION: Well, fine. I don't do that. I spend– I don't do anything, actually. That's my turn.

MATT: Okay. Vax, you're up.

LIAM: Okay, so Clarota's right by it, so I'm going to roll along the back of the thing and sneak attack right into its back.

MATT: Right here?

LIAM: Right there. Yeah, roll around next to him, one dagger in. That is a 29.

MATT: 29. Yeah, that hits. Damn.

LIAM: (counts quietly) Okay, that is 33, plus sneak attack damage, so three, seven. Shit. 18, 20. That's 40 plus four. 44.

MATT: Rogues, man.

LIAM: 51. I want to carve his shoulder blade out and away like a piece of turkey–

MATT: It's not a critical.

LIAM: No. Critical's the double. Oh, sorry, scale that back to–

MATT: That's a lot for a non-critical. Holy shit. (laughs)

LIAM: 20. It was 20 plus two, 22. 29.

MATT: 29 points of damage. Still nice. So as you reach back and you angrily take the dagger and drag it down, you actually find one of those seams of its arm, and you drag it across the front as the arm actually (floop) falls off on the ground and it squirms on its own.

ASHLEY: What's taking this thing so long?

MATT: You've managed to pull one of its tentacles off.

LIAM: Next dagger's out. That was a bad roll, but I'm going to use one of my Lucks to do that again. That hits. That's 27.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: So that is seven points of damage.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: Last dagger out. That's 26, for eight points of damage.

MATT: Nice. Eight points of damage, got it. Great!

ASHLEY: How is this thing not dead?!

MATT: Kima is going to rush around here.

MARISHA: Don't be stupid, Kima!

SAM: What is it with you and Kima?

MARISHA: She's been stupid, all right?

LAURA: What are you talking about? She's a paladin!

SAM: She's fighting with us! Don't dispirit her while we're fighting!

LIAM: This is really awkward for the rest of us, just so you know. We really like her.

MATT: Kima's going to attack twice with her greatsword.

MARISHA: I don't like her.

SAM: I don't like her either, but I'm not openly hostile to her.

MATT: Kima goes to strike twice, but with each blade strike, the head glimpses over, sees the attack and the body bends out of the way of the first strike. The second one, a tentacle actually slaps the blade out of her hand and she has to reach over and pick it up again off the side of the ground. The blind was very effective these past couple of rounds, but now it's back to its full strength and can see, and you can see now that it can see where everyone is, it's going to be much harder to hit. Unless you're this guy and this girl. That brings us to Clarota. Clarota can't use what Clarota wants to do, unfortunately. Instead, is going to–

ASHLEY: What does Clarota want to do?

TALIESIN: Dance.

ASHLEY AND LAURA: Dance!

MATT: You've had it used on you before. It's called a Mind Blast that the mind flayers did before in a cone attack that can stun things in front of it. But everyone's been clustered around it, so Clarota can't quite get a place that doesn't affect somebody else. So instead he's going to do a tentacle attack against it. That is– oh, wow! That's a 26. That hits! Takes 15 points of damage and is grappled by Clarota. Clarota currently has his tentacles wrapped up onto it and is trying to pull it down with a combination of psionic energy and its tentacle grab. Keyleth, you're up!

MARISHA: Seeing that Clarota just grappled him, I'm like, “All right, cool. That's good.” And I'm going to use a Grasping Vine from the other stalactite and grab Trinket and see if I can–

LAURA: Around his waist!

MARISHA: Okay. Around his waist.

MATT: All right. You use another 4th-level Grasping Vine?

MARISHA: Yeah.

MATT: Okay. So the Grasping Vine– from this one here?

MARISHA: Nope, that one.

MATT: Okay. The wall is here, so it's going to have to curl around the side, wrap around the body. As it begins to pull, you can see the bones have already begun to reach up and begun to start pulling Trinket's body down. Go ahead and make the check for that again which is…

MARISHA: What is it?

TALIESIN: Will.

MARISHA: Oh, will?

MATT: For this one I think it was to try and– wait a sec, I'm just making sure. I think it was wisdom for the– Let me check it real fast, just to make sure. This is starting to get down to the heavy. “Creature must make dexterity saving throw to resist pull.” Yeah, so go ahead and make a willpower check. Wisdom check, sorry.

MARISHA: 20 again.

MATT: The vine wraps around Trinket and begins to pull. The bones hold tight and the body is not moving from its position.

LAURA: No!

MATT: It's a standoff between the vine holding the unconscious body of Trinket, who you can see is still moving and shifting in unconsciousness. The bones are beginning to rise up almost like this slow tide to begin to wrap over the body. All right, that brings us to Percy.

ASHLEY: Wait, so we don't know?

MATT: It's at a standoff right now.

MARISHA: It's a standoff. It's tug-of-war.

MATT: Yeah. Not sinking, but not being pulled out, either. It's this stalemate right now between the two. The vine is taut and holding Trinket level.

TALIESIN: Okay, I'm going to spend my movement to get nice and firm, sit myself down, pull out the big gun.

MATT: Okay. Bad News. You see it over this wall now. The top of this stalagmite– it's about 50 feet to the top. You get to the top, you pull the Bad News out. You have a pretty clear shot down towards the entity.

TALIESIN: Taking a sharpshooter shot. Natural 20 on the first shot.

(all cheer)

MATT: Go ahead and roll damage for this one.

TALIESIN: This is going to be so much fun. (counts out loud) 42 points of damage.

MATT: How do you want to do this?

(all cheer)

TALIESIN: I take a bead and I want to wait until the eye is looking right at me, and I want to take it right through the eye.

MATT: Okay. So as the entity turns around, its head cocked to the side, its tendrils (sucking noise) flailing around it, one lifting it up. You can see, it begins to reach up to bring a lash down upon the bear that is being clasped on the ground, its eye streaks around and catches yours. You release, pull back on the trigger… (gunshot) The impact blows you off the top of the stalagmite. You fall in the air, but in that split second, you keep your vision on as you're floating back and this whole– this moment as time slows, not wanting to lose this moment, you see the bullet (ssst) into the head. One of the eyes now goes dark from the crimson impact. The jaw opens slack (groaning), with all the teeth exposing as the back of the head (explosion).

TALIESIN: (maniacal laughter)

MATT: Explodes. All across Vax. Who was standing behind it, just (vrushh)

LIAM: I love it!

(all laugh)

MATT: The giant hole now, which is like you can see portions of its lower jaw are still visible, but the entire top of its head is gone. You can see parts of its flesh trying to reach up and re-form, and then starting falling limp as its form begins to quiver and eventually fall apart. The seams all begin to unravel and its entire body begins to fall apart into chunks. Eventually what's left is this elven torso that slinks to its knees (boof), takes a step,takes another step, and then falls onto its back, completely destroyed. The bones begin to reach up and take its body. Trinket is still currently being held aloft.

ORION: I see what's going on. I cast Telekinesis (fssh) and start pulling it up.

MATT: Okay, make an arcana check. You have advantage on this because the Grasping Vine is also helping.

ORION: Oh my god. Arcana? 12.

MATT: 12? You (strains) you're pulling, you're pulling, you're pulling, but unfortunately whatever cursed force holds this land is keeping the body–

ASHLEY: Okay, I run up and take the Mace of Disruption, which also has the holy oil on it, which fights against undead! So I take it and I go (ffff) right underneath.

MATT: All right. Pike, you're on top of the wall. You look down and see this happening with the effort of both of them unable to do so. You leap off the top of the wall, swinging the Mace of Disruption down in a giant arc. You slam it into the bones on the side of Trinket's body. As you do, you see the actual stone and bones around it cave in and shatter into dust at the sheer force of your Mace of Disruption, leaving this big old cavernous space where there once was ground. As you bring it up again, you begin swinging it around the outside of Trinket, releasing all of the bone in the vicinity. As you do, you also notice that the bone at your feet that's beginning to grab onto your legs as you landed begins to give away and slowly back away from you.

MARISHA: Grab onto the vine!

LIAM: It's scared of her.

ASHLEY: It's scared of me. Yeah, that's right!

LAURA: Get Trinket out, and I'll pull Pike up.

MARISHA: Okay, I pull the bear out.

MATT: Between the two of you guys, you manage to, now that it's been released from the bone, as Tiberius (strains) lifts up and the vine grasping, you lift Trinket up onto the wall, and Tiberius you (thud) release Trinket on the top of the wall.

LAURA: I'm healing! Giving a healing potion.

MARISHA: Can I take my Grasping Vine and I want to reach out and grab the elven man real quick.

MATT: You reach out the Grasping Vine and you lift up the remnants of the elven man.

MARISHA: Yeah?

MATT: Yeah.

MARISHA: And I want to throw his remnants back onto our dance floor.

MATT: Okay. Well, the dance floor– the wall here? So you chuck the corpse up onto the stone wall. All right, so you've all gathered around, you administer a potion. Trinket heals– which potion are you using?

LAURA: The minimum, because someone else can heal him, right?

ASHLEY: Yeah.

MATT: Yeah, yeah. That'll be 2d4 plus two.

LAURA: Seven. He's only got seven little health points!

MATT: All right, so Trinket comes to consciousness. (bear moan)

LAURA: Trinket!

MATT: As soon as it opens up and the first thing Trinket sees is your face, Trinket begins to lick the side of your face.

LAURA: Oh! (sobs) Buddy! I'm crying and I'm petting him and I say, “It's okay.”

MATT: Kima, Clarota, and Vax. You guys are still on the ground. You can feel the stones and bones beginning to pull up against your feet. Clarota immediately begins to lift off the ground using his Levitation ability, and pulls free of the bones, lifts there for a second. Yes?

ASHLEY: Can I keep propellering my Mace of Disruption as I walk? On the ground?

MATT: You can. As you're walking along, you're just (kssh) hitting bits of bone. As you are, they just disintegrate and turn into dust. It's leaving a track. A little bit of a groove in the ground as you do so.

ASHLEY: Follow me! Follow the track!

MARISHA: I'm going to loot this corpse real quick. See if I see anything with this.

MATT: Make an investigation check.

MARISHA: With this corpse. Does anyone want to help me? Who's got better investigation?

TALIESIN AND SAM: Sure.

LAURA: I've got it, but I'm busy with Trinket.

MARISHA: Ugh, yeah.

TALIESIN: Yeah, never mind.

SAM: I've got it. 24.

MATT: 24? All right.

MARISHA: Scanlan!

MATT: You start looking at it, and the clothes that are on it are soiled and destroyed and are just ruined by whatever process it went through. as you inspect the shoulders where the tentacles are, you start seeing these strange little fleshy nubs, and as you pull away at where the wounds were taken from pulling off, you can see there are arms inside the torso that were pushed inside to attach this entity.

ASHLEY: Can we–

MATT: Can you what?

ASHLEY: Go ahead. Sorry.

MATT: You can see a couple of fingers poking out of each side.

ASHLEY: Should we take the body?

SAM: Do we see any ligatures? Is there sewing? Or has it been stitched together?

MATT: The tentacles were stitched to it, and you can't see any actual stitches, like it's this weird thing where it's actually bonded to it, but it looks like some sort of strange–

ORION: I'll do an arcana check on that, and I already got 22.

MATT: Okay. There is a magical essence from somewhere in the torso, but you can't quite ascertain–

MARISHA: From somewhere in the torso?

MATT: Yes.

LAURA: Do we recognize this elf at all?

MATT: (laughs) You don't recognize any of its face because it's gone. Bad News disintegrated its head. Unless you want to piece all the pieces that are currently on Vax together and try to reform the face, but from what you can tell it wasn't anything you could recognize necessarily.

SAM: I'll take out my dagger and dig into his torso.

MATT: As you (squishy flesh sounds) begin to pull out bits, the rest of you guys manage to make your way up to the top of this stone wall now. You're all for the most part safe, for the time being.

TALIESIN: Thank you for that.

MATT: Sorry. You cut through the body. You start seeing there are just layers and layers of teeth growing out of all portions in the interior of it. You find the fingers are attached to a hand, which are attached to a wrist. You pull a little bit, and with this horrible sickening (fssht) sound you manage to pull an arm out from inside the torso, covered in its own blood and fluids.

ORION: Prestidigitation! Clean that up.

MATT: You clean it off. The magical essence you were seeing earlier actually is coming from a set of metallic bracers that are on the wrists.

SAM: Take them! I take them.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Don't put them on, though. Don't put them on.

ORION: I'll inspect them.

LIAM: They're cursed.

MATT: Okay. Make an arcana check.

ORION: Let's see. 13.

MATT: 13? It takes you a while, but you manage to get an idea of what the essence of the magic is.

MARISHA: I think it's for you, Vex.

LAURA: Oh, really? Let me see it.

ORION: Translated, it's Bracers of Archery. You should check it out.

ASHLEY: Can I cast Cure Wounds on Trinket? And I cast him to 20. Second level. I rolled.

MATT: You rolled a 20 total?

ASHLEY: Yeah. 20 total.

MATT: Okay. So Trinket heals 20 more hit points.

LAURA: Oh, yay! Really?

MATT: So keep tabs on that because that will carry over into the next session. All right. So you guys are now standing aloft, on the wall. You can barely see past, about another 120, 150 feet ahead of you, the sea of bone chips and glass seems to eventually fade into more stone.

MARISHA: Let's get out of here.

SAM: Hey, will you lead the way, Pike, with your crazy mace path?

LIAM: Air guitar us out of here?

ASHLEY: Can I keep on? (guitar noises)

ORION: Actually, wait a minute. Hold on a sec. My water sphere is still there, isn't it? I'm going to take it and push it along our way as well, in front of her who's swinging it as well.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: Push it up to 30 feet.

MATT: So you're pushing this behind her?

ORION: In front of her. Just a nice little (pssht) like 30 feet from where we are.

MATT: Okay. So the sphere crests ahead as you guys push forward. Pike, you're taking your mace of disruption with your shield up and you're slamming it before you. As it does there's just plumes of dust that are being cast in the air behind you guys. You cough a little bit as it's lifting the small spray of dust. You begin to make your way across this open field of bone and glass to the other side, finding for the first time in a little bit of time solid stone ground. You all take a moment and gather your breath, and as you're taking a moment, you look over and you can see in the darkness ahead of you what looks to be a faint source of light around another large pillar or cluster of stone in the distance.

ASHLEY: Is it a color?

LAURA: Do I see any tracks around?

MATT: It's reddish-orange and appears to have a flicker to it.

LAURA: Do I see tracks? Can I sense goliath tracks?

MATT: Go ahead and roll a survival check.

SAM: How far away is it from us?

MATT: It's probably about 70, 80 feet.

LAURA: 25.

MATT: 25? You see more duergar feet patterns, and you see those same singular tracks.

LIAM: And you said it's flickering, the light?

MATT: Yes.

LIAM: Probably a campfire.

SAM: Let's go kick some ass.

MARISHA: Want to go see?

LIAM: I'll go take a look.

MATT: Roll stealth.

MARISHA: Take a short rest there.

SAM: Do we need it? Is anyone hurt?

MARISHA: Just a short one.

LIAM: 25.

MATT: 25?

LIAM: Everyone rest while I go peek, because I'm fine.

SAM: We don't need rest for spells, we just need rest for health, right?

MARISHA: Just a short rest, yeah, so I can recharge my animal changes.

ASHLEY: If we take a short rest, do we get any spells back?

MATT: No spells back, unfortunately. You guys stay back while you go ahead and stealth your way up. Did you roll disadvantage on that one?

LIAM: Disadvantage?

SAM: Your foot.

LAURA: Because of your foot!

LIAM: But the cloak then cancels it out.

MATT: That's right, yes, so you're fine. It's a natural roll.

LIAM: So 25.

MATT: 25, okay. So you make your way through the darkness, around the side of the stone platform and as you crest your vision, you can see the flickering is indeed a small campfire. Not used for light, but apparently used for cooking as the scent also hits you. There is some sort of meat currently being cooked on this flame.

LIAM: Does it smell good?

MATT: It smells pretty good. You're not quite sure what the source of the meat is. You worry for a second because you see the two duergar that are sitting there, currently holding the meat in the center of this, are staying next to a giant troll who has his hand on the side of a rickety wooden cart. On this cart, which you can see, there are two sets of wheels on each side, there is a large lumbering goliath individual currently held down with bands of iron. Your mind for second thinks, “Oh god, are they eating him?” but you see he appears to be intact, though with a quick glance as you peer around the other side of the stone column, you can see his body is riddled with scratches and small wounds and incisions, and you can see where streaks of dried blood are across his entire body.

LAURA: They're going to try to make him into one of the stitch monsters!

MARISHA: Yes, they are.

LAURA: We're not there.

MATT: You also do see, across the way there are three tents set up around this area. One of the tents opens up and you see a duergar female step out: silver circlet across her forehead, long robes. Queen Ulara walks up and starts talking to the other duergar, pointing to your goliath friend, to Grog, on the front of this. Motions to the other two and steps back into the tent, closing it behind her as the two other duergar grin. One reaches into his pouch and begins to pull out small, looks like metal hooked utensils, possibly to go in for another round of whatever they'd been doing.

ASHLEY: I'm going to kill that bitch!

LIAM: Into my earring, (whispers) Come, now.

ORION: Ooh! Vax just said we should go!

LAURA: (whispers) We should go!

MATT: And this is where we're going to end today's session.

(all groan)

SAM: Wow. That was exciting, and I feel empowering to a lot of the female–

(all laugh)

ORION: Female viewers, absolutely.

SAM: Pike did a lot of important things.

ORION: Absolutely, I would agree.
Post-Show

ZAC: Hola, everybody!

ALL: Hola!

ZAC: (sighs) That was intense again! You guys are giving me anxiety attacks, you guys and Felicia being in the chat room the whole time. So I wanted to shout out some thank yous. Oh, and you guys still have time if you scroll down on the main page to 826LA donate button, click on that and donate for these guys, for the wonderful work that they're doing, and we're getting ready to read out all of your donation messages on the stream.

MATT: Yes, thank you guys so much for donating to 826LA. They're an amazing charity and your support is very much appreciated.

ZAC: First off, we wanted to thank a couple people that provided the food for tonight.

ALL: Yeah!

ZAC: ManaGeek Moosiyuk, Moosiuk?

MATT: Moosiuk! ManaGeek! Thank you guys!

ZAC: And Timothy Hudson and Amir.

MATT: Thank you, Amir!

LAURA: It was so good!

ZAC: Donation messages…

MATT: Just a note, guys, good choice tonight on the abyssal abomination.

LAURA: Oh, they did that?!

ZAC: That was the chat room.

LAURA: You did that?!

MARISHA: They did, yeah…

ASHLEY: Chat room!

LAURA: That was mean!

TALIESIN: You almost killed a bear.

ZAC: Okay, guys. We've got a lot of these. You ready? We've got AxisOfAnarchy. “Less than three Matt, Taliesin, Ashley, Marisha, Laura, Liam, Orion, and Sam. #FindGrog.”

ORION: We did!

LIAM: We found him.

ZAC: Vorack1024. “Glad to donate every week for such a good cause. Critical Role is an inspiration to my entire D&D party, and watching helps my DMing greatly. Thank you so much.”

ASHLEY: Oh, man. Yay, thank you!

MATT: That's awesome.

ZAC: Meg_TheDreamer. “#CriticalRole, thank you so much for everything with”– oh gosh, these are so hard to read– “with amazing stories, adventures, and great senses of humor that brings happiness and makes me laugh and warms my heart. Thank you so much for the love, my art, oh, twitter @TheAnimeDreamer and my birthday wishes to Meghan L.“

TALIESIN: Oh, Meghan! Yay!

MARISHA: Thanks for all your art, Meghan. Your art's great.

ZAC: ZandorInvictus. "Made the easy decision to skip the midnight showing of Avengers to catch the show. #LessThanThree.”

MATT: Aw!

TALIESIN: Easy decision!

ZAC: You're a better man than Grog! I also suggest all of you guys hit up Twitter and give Travis some shit.

MATT: Playfully loving shit because the movie's awesome and it's great.

LAURA: Yeah, loving shit.

ORION: Follow us on Twitter, and then help us.

ZAC: Let him know that Overlord says he's in trouble. BeansyMccoy. “No, but seriously, I need a shirt that says 'how do you want to do this?'”

ASHLEY: I know.

SAM: We're working on it.

ORION: Yeah, we're working on it.

ZAC: OutdatedReference. “About to run my first session of D&D this Sunday. Thanks to you guys for the inspiration, so excited.”

(all cheer)

MATT: Make it happen!

ORION: Good luck!

MATT: May your dice roll 20s and TPK your party.

ZAC: WTSFox, thank you. TonyLoneFight. “You are all so amazing, thank you so much for sharing this, I hope this donation helps.”

MARISHA: It does. Thank you Tony!

ZAC: UselessRogue–

MATT: UselessRogue, yeah! What's up?

ASHLEY: Hey! You're not useless!

MARISHA: (shouting) UselessRogue!

MATT: “Assuaging my guilt over my vote in the straw-poll tonight.” I thought you chose well. That was a fun fight.

ZAC: Yeah. SilentKagosha. “Critical Role: adding a cave-effect to the audio when you are in the cave adds an interesting atmosphere to the show.”

MATT: Awesome! Thank you!

ZAC: That's what they did. He kept saying that in the chatroom and I was like, “I wish I could do that for you but I can't do anything about that.” Too much work! BrrCold donated. “For Zac Eubank and all that he does.” Aw, thanks, Curt! Appreciate that.

ASHLEY: Thanks Curt!

ZAC: G1BigDaddyHef. “Working retail can be draining and I want to thank you so much for inspiring me and brightening my day. Currently working on creating a new campaign to try and get my coworkers involved in. I'm happy to lend some money to help out the 826LA charity.”

MATT: Aw, thank you so much!

MARISHA: We've been there in retail, and we feel your pain

ZAC: Kedofett101. “If I can help such a great cause with a donation, the way…” Gosh, it's a lot, sorry. “If I can help with such a great cause with a donation, the way you wonderful people help me, then I'll give what I can. Thank you so much for bringing a smile to my face with your amazing work and the awesomeness that is Critical Role. Love you guys.”

MATT: Thank you so much.

ORION: Thanks bud, I'll take all the credit for that one.

TALIESIN: Yeah.

MATT: Yeah.

ZAC: Resident Ogre. CritKarma.

MARISHA: CritKarma!

ZAC: KatyaisaLie. Thank you.

ORION: Thank you, Katya.

ZAC: VerCatJoel. “You guys are amazing. Thanks for making this week more fun and wanting to help kids.”

MATT: Thank you, VerCatJoel.

ZAC: GeoNerd79. “I love you guys. So many emotions.”

MATT: I feel you, GeoNerd!

MARISHA: (laughs) Thanks, GeoNerd!

MATT: I feel you.

ZAC: Poltergeist123. “#Lessthan3.”

MATT: Thank you, Poltergeist.

MARISHA: Thanks, Poltergeist.

ORION: Thank you.

ZAC: And we're reloading to see who all has donated since. Okay, some more. HomeGrownHero. “I just got here. I missed everything. Can I watch tonight's show somewhere?” Yeah! If you're a sub, it'll be up immediately. If you're not a sub, we'll do a rebroadcast, and if you wait (whistles) four hours from now, it'll probably be back in the rotation, and by tomorrow afternoon it'll be up on the website.

MARISHA: Geekandsundry.com.

ZAC: Correct. WheelyFactoids. “Liam, do you prefer single- or double-edged blade, and Laura, what color is Trinket?”

LAURA: Trinket is brown.

LIAM: Double-edged.

ZAC: Bam! Factoids! Zofer. “Amazing show, and a worthy cause.”

MATT: Awesome. Thank you, Zofer.

ZAC: Aldowin. “Keep up the awesome work you're doing.”

MATT: Thank you Aldowin!

ORION: Thanks Aldowin.

TALIESIN: Thank you.

ZAC: TheFallenTitan: “Loving CritRole, keep it up.” Also, “Oh-ree-awn, are you going to make any more music videos with Alex Lewis?”

ORION: It's Orion, Zac.

ZAC: Orion!

ORION: Chatroom, accost him for that, please.

ZAC: (whispering) They spelled it wrong and I just read it.

ORION: (laughing) Yeah! Actually, me and Alex Lewis / I8athumbtack are doing more music videos and funny stuff. Thank you for asking.

MARISHA: Yes.

ZAC: CheeseBug88 “LessThanThree.”

MATT: CheeseBug!

MARISHA: CheeseBug!

ASHLEY: CheeseBug!

ZAC: ACrazyNexy “LessThanThree to the Critical Role team.”

MATT: Aw, thank you, CrazyNexy.

ZAC: Thank you guys so much. Just because we didn't get a chance to read, please don't stop donating. All you've got to do is scroll down to donate to 856LA or they'll link it in the chat room. Tune in tomorrow. We have Felicia Day stopping by to play Lady Games, so everyone will be dressed up in suits.

SAM: I'll be watching that! It's my favorite.

ORION: Absolutely. He watches it all the time.

ZAC: We're playing Ladies and Gentlemen, and there might be some gender reversal going on in that, and we're also going to be doing a new card game that was just Kickstarted with Indicade, and we have musical guest Echo Sparks coming by, as well as So You Don't Have To with Hector and Becca. We will be doing some things to them that are not very polite, and making them play pony games because we have a lot of pony Steam keys to give away.

MARISHA: Interesting.

ASHLEY: Ponies!

MARISHA: Everyone, Matt and I recently did another Hot Pepper Gaming video. Another Hot Pepper Game review, so, go check it out on Youtube at HotPepperGaming. They're super fun.

LAURA: They completely keep their composure.

MATT: Oh, totally.

TALIESIN: They don't break.

MARISHA: Chat room should start pressuring these guys to all do one.

TALIESIN: What? No.

ORION: I've already put my request into Hot Pepper–

LAURA: I want to do it!

MARISHA: He's done one before.

ORION: I've done one before. I think I had the grossest HotPepperGaming.

LAURA: Just snot running out of my face. I want to do it!

LIAM: I do not.

ZAC: They want me to show you while we're live, Ashley, the emote that they made for you.

LAURA: I saw it! It's so cute!

ASHLEY: You guys made me an emote!

MARISHA: They made an emote for Ashley?

ZAC: Start post. She's watching the chat room guys, so just start…

MARISHA: What is it? Wait, I want to see it! Pull up the chat room!

LAURA: Is she an astronaut? That's what it looked like.

LIAM: Is it a pony suit, is it Spider Gwen? What's she wearing?

ZAC: It's an astronaut.

LAURA: It's an astronaut, Ashley!

ASHLEY: Oh! Come on guys! That's awesome!

MARISHA: Astronaut Ashley!

ASHLEY: Oh, what the heck!

TALIESIN: There it is. Oh my god! That's so cute.

MARISHA: (laughs) Wait, there it is! Oh my god, that's amazing!

TALIESIN: They're like little Buzz Lightyears!

MATT: That's fantastic! Well done, guys.

ZAC: Thank you guys for tuning in.

MATT: Thank you guys so much. Have a wonderful night. We'll see you next week!

ALL: Bye! 

Pre-Show

MATT: Welcome and good evening, everyone. Welcome to this week's episode of Critical Role, where a bunch of us voice actors, who are also huge geeks, sit around and roll dice and have a good time in the wondrous journey of Dungeons & Dragons. We'll go ahead and get things started with some character backstories, have a settle in here, get the cameras ready, and then we'll start the action as soon as we return. So we'll see you guys here very soon.

[rock music] [dramatic music] [character backstories]

MATT: Hello, and welcome back! So before we start, a couple of quick announcements and things we want to get out to you guys. One, unfortunately Ashley cannot be here tonight, so we're missing Pike, sadly. I'll be controlling her as the terrible AI for the evening. Apologies in advance, guys. She's only your healer.

(all laugh)

MATT: Also, as a note, we're still doing the subscriber giveaways tonight. Our next goal is 2,700 subscribers. We'll be giving away another tabletop promo kit that are exclusive only to this now. You cannot find them anywhere else. So we'll be giving one of those away to somebody in the chat room, once we hit 2,700 subscribers. Which is awesome! Also, we have our charity we run every week, 826LA. Marisha, if you want to explain that a little bit.

MARISHA: Yes! 826LA is a non-profit tutoring program for kids K through 12th grade. And they're really big on creative writing and storytelling, and they also have a storefront, the Time Travel Mart, in–

LAURA AND TALIESIN: Echo Park

MARISHA: Echo Park! Thank-you. And Mar Vista. There's also one in Mar Vista, and there might be an 826 in your city, I know there's one in Seattle, and Chicago, and New York. So look them up, they're awesome, and yes. They do great work. And you can also tutor for them! You should volunteer.

MATT: Which is also great!

ORION: Yeah.

MARISHA: Volunteer to be a tutor for 826.

MATT: Tutor to teach them to write modules for D&D.

ORION: Think you're smart, huh? Think you're smart?

LAURA: Do you think you're smart?

MARISHA: Think you're smart? Can you teach a 5th grader?

MATT: Exactly. And also, if you donate to 826LA at the end of the show today we'll read off some of the messages you guys wrote as part of donations, at the end of the show, so we'll give you personal thanks for that at the end of… of today. So that's be cool. Also, I'm wearing a shirt. You notice it's grey-ish colored, this is our second run of the first– And I say first, because there's hopefully more to come soon– Critical Role shirt. You guys keep asking for it, we finally set up a Teespring. It'll only be up for the next two weeks, and we're trying to hit certain goals, so that if we manage to hit a thousand tees sold, we're going to go ahead and do another full cast Q&A. If we can all find any that we're available for.

LAURA: Oh, awesome!

MATT: But yeah, so these shirts are available. They're on Teespring.com/Critical-Role. We've already had a few trolls go in there and create their own T-shirts, and say that they're official when they're not, so don't buy those.

MARISHA: Not ours. It's those! That's what it looks like.

MATT: So this grey with full cast setup there.

ORION: They didn't even ask us.

MARISHA: So the first ones we did in navy. These are done in grey.

LIAM: Second edition.

MARISHA: And then we'll probably retire this design after this.

MATT: After this. This'll be your one chance to get this design, and we have more stuff coming down the road hopefully. But yeah! So check it out Teespring.com/Critical-Role. If you guys want one, go grab one. Also, quick little things you want to promote that we've been working on recently. Marisha and Taliesin? You said you wanted to…

TALIESIN: Yeah! We just did some voices for the new Marvel: Age of Ultron pinball game.

MARISHA: Yes!

TALIESIN: I did the voice of Ultron, so you can hear me be evil!

MARISHA: (laughs) Yes, and I voice Black Widow. And doing a little… little ScarJo… up in there.

ORION: Yeah. No! Doing a little Marisha Ray up in there.

MATT: Speaking of Black Widow…

MARISHA: And speaking– speaking of Black Widow!

LAURA: Oh, yeah! So now two Black Widows in the house.

MARISHA: (makes high-five sound effect) Black Widow!

LAURA: Yeah, cause we all do Avengers Assemble. On Disney XD.

TRAVIS: Every Sunday morning.

LAURA: What what what!

MARISHA: Avengers assemble!

LAURA: Thor, Black Widow, Red Skull. You bastard.

TRAVIS: Don't say anything!

SAM: He also plays Black Widow.

MATT: It's a whole new weird arc.

MARISHA: Black Widows, woo!

LAURA: And then the episode of TableTop that I did just dropped today, as well.

MATT: That's awesome.

ORION: Nice!

MATT: Go check that out. Watch Laura go and destroy a bunch of folks on another game.

LAURA: Yeah. A very scary horror RPG.

MATT: Ooh, that sounds awesome.

ORION: Is there anything else?

MATT: I have something, but you're next.

ORION: And my comedy troupe, i8athumbtack on YouTube, we just put out a video called “Helping the Homeless!” You should check it out. There's this douchebag called fouseyTUBE that we were parodying, and we think it's funny.

MATT: Awesome.

ORION: But yeah, that just came out a couple days ago.

LIAM: And I should have done this a couple of weeks ago, but Transformers: Robots in Disguise is now on the telly, and I play a Decepticon named Underbite, who eats everything. It's a really well done show, and Decepticons are better than Autobots, and check it out.

LAURA: You're villains on everything, are you?

LIAM: Hell yeah.

TRAVIS: Do you have a lisp in that show?

MATT: He gives good villain.

LIAM: Not on this show. What?

TRAVIS: What?

MATT: Yeah.There you go. Also I have the pleasure today to announce that I am the voice of Tim Drake, Robin, in Arkham Knight.

TRAVIS: Yeah!

MATT: So I'm excited about that.

MARISHA: Tim Drake!

LIAM: That game looks boring.

MATT: I know, pfft! Who's going to touch it? Yeah… that was a huge honor, so I'm really excited about that. So if anyone has anything else? Those are our announcements for this evening. We can hop on in. Also, those that the t-shirts, I think it just got set up in the chat room that if you scroll all the way to the bottom there will be a button for you to find the t-shirts, so even easier way of getting to them. Check it out. Anyway! So, into the game. Let me go ahead and get the music going because I think that's a required aspect of this as far as I'm concerned.

LIAM: I'm always nervous in the first five minutes.

TALIESIN: You remember how to play?

LIAM: I got dice.

SAM: Here we go.
Part I

MATT: So. As a quick overview as to where we were, the party essentially was given a quest from the capital city of Emon to find the missing folk hero Lady Kima of Vord, a halfling paladin, very well known, who had gone missing while on a pilgrimage vision quest over the past year. She had been missing for a number of weeks, nearly months at this point, and you were sent to the dwarven city of Kraghammer to find and bring her back safely. After going to the city, you discover that she had delved into the mines, seeking some sort of extremely dark evil that was seated somewhere deep beneath Kraghammer proper. In searching for her, you managed to find your way through the mines into the entrance passage into the Underdark. The Underdark which is a very scary place. You've encountered a number of subterranean beasts and creatures, some of which are unnaturally mutated or altered by some sort of magic you cannot place.

Upon going through these caverns, a few battles with duergar, the ashen-skinned evil subterranean dwarves– further subterranean dwarves, I guess you'd say, and encountered your first mind flayers, illithids, which seem to have allied, strangely, with the duergar. Normally enemies by nature, they're working together under what you discovered in sense is a common enemy referred to as K'Varn. Nothing really is known of K'Varn, other than it has a great power and has united these two forces for some nefarious purpose. Apparently these abominations, and these strange mutations you've encountered, these experiments, also seem to have been created by K'Varn, though no one knows quite why or how.

As you traversed down, you managed to… befriend an arcanist mind flayer that was cast out from the colony, named Clarota, who has aided you under the intent that you would help him free his people of the slavery of K'Varn and release the mind flayers to their own normal state of mind. And you've made your way to the Duergar fortress, Emberhold, found and released Lady Kima, who underwent many, many weeks of torturous experiences to come through still firm of mind and ready to kick some ass. Through a very painful battle in the Emberhold, you managed to pull your party out, only a few of them turned to stone, and with a foot burned off.

(all laugh)

MATT: And Grog being dominated and Grog-napped by the surviving queen, duergar Queen Ulara.

TRAVIS: What? Everybody needs a nap.

MARISHA: We're going to have to get one of those child leashes for you.

LAURA: Maybe we can get a chip implanted in him so we can track him all the time.

MARISHA: Oh yeah, like a dog chip?

MATT: (laughs) So get on enchanting that, Tiberius.

TRAVIS: I like chips.

LAURA: Yeah. Or like one of those tiles you put on your keys.

MARISHA: Yes. That's actually not a bad idea. Can we do that?

TALIESIN: There's an app for that.

SAM: A Grog-jack?

TRAVIS: Percy, you can make that.

MATT: Grog-jack? Whenever he gets taken, it gives a little beeper in your pocket.

SAM: Yeah.

MATT: So, the party then, in trying to locate Grog's position, found their way delving past the lava fall-based element of the obsidian rock duergar Underdark. Deeper into discovering this… cursed… pit of undeath, bone shards, and glass. Upon traversing it they encountered one of these abominations that you've seen traces of left before, this weird, half… partial elven, partial tentacle monstrosity, that slashed through your party, nearly killed Trinket, but was defeated by you.

You managed to make your way across this bone field and discover what appears to be a camp, across a number of pillars in the distance. Vax went ahead and stealthed up, looked over and saw that there was a camp of duergar, and apparently the surviving Queen Ulara giving them orders. Next to Grog, who is currently bolted by iron bands to some sort of a cart that they've been dragging him through this tunnel passage with. And that is where we have left off. So.

TALIESIN: I think I've got a plan.

SAM: Oh. Because I did, too.

TALIESIN: You have a plan?

SAM: No, I want to hear yours. Let's do them both without telling, and just see what happens.

TALIESIN: I'll Roshambo you for it.

ORION: I actually– I actually like this idea, Scanlan.

TALIESIN: Keyleth can meld through rock. So, if we can get the attention of everyone who's guarding Grog, she could slip through while we're drawing them out, and get through and let him go in the midst of the fight.

SAM: That works with my plan.

TALIESIN: That works with your plan?

SAM: My plan was to– was to go in there and distract them while you did something!

(all laugh)

LAURA: Perfect plan!

TALIESIN: I like that plan.

SAM: I hadn't completed the thought because the something hadn't been worked out.

TALIESIN: You were 80% there.

LIAM: Actually, let me tell you all that Grog is up here, you didn't know.

TALIESIN: I assumed you'd come back by now.

LIAM: No, I'm still up there.

SAM: That raises the stakes!

(all laugh)

LIAM: Last week I said, “Come up now.” And that's when he called it.

ORION: And I had already taken off. So I'm already headed there.

MATT: All right.

TALIESIN: Well, he's at least said, “Come up now.”

MARISHA: So we're… we're there.

MATT: So Tiberius, roll a stealth check.

LAURA: Great… Great, Tiberius, go for it.

TALIESIN: Damn it.

LIAM: “Hold on, let me show you my collection of tin cans tied to my tail.”

ORION: Actually, you know what? No, I'm fine, I'll just roll.

TRAVIS: Yeah, roll the shit out of that.

ORION: 16.

MATT: 16? Okay. So, as Tiberius coasts up along the back portion of Vax's arrival point…

LIAM: (whispering) Where is everybody?

LAURA: (whispering) We're on our way.

ORION: (whispering) I don't know. I heard you–

MATT: You notice one of the duergar looks over his shoulder in your direction.

SAM: And plan over.

MATT: And begins to make a few steps in that direction.

MARISHA: Wait. Who? You?

SAM: Yeah, he went in anyway.

LAURA: Yeah, and he's not stealthed enough.

LIAM: All right, I grab Tiberius by the snout and pull him back, around the edge of that rock. I'm just doing it. Pulling my dagger out.

MATT: All right. So the duergar continues to move forward towards the edge of the rock…

LIAM: Oh, come up here please…

LAURA: “Okay!” We stealth. Can I head that way?

LIAM: And I'm throwing a knife into the dwarf's neck.

SAM: Oh, Jesus! That's not very stealthy at all!

LIAM: Well, it's coming over!

MATT: All right, so the rest of you guys go ahead and roll stealth.

LIAM: He's not waiting!

SAM: We've been doing this for 30 seconds. We're already in a fight! I was going to distract them!

LIAM: I'm not going to stand here and wait for the duergar to walk around the corner.

ORION: I was going to distract them, too.

MATT: And… you got one of them.

TRAVIS: It's a classic movie moment.

SAM: I'm going in. I'm walking into the camp.

MARISHA: What? Wait, okay, wait. Are we abandoning the plan?

TALIESIN: No, we're just going for it right now.

MARISHA: All right!

LIAM: Oh my god!

MATT: All right, so the rest of you…

LAURA: I rolled a nine, so it doesn't even matter.

MATT: It doesn't matter at this point.

TALIESIN: I rolled a ten, yeah.

MATT: Okay, so the rest of you begin trudging in, down this tunnel, towards the edge.

TALIESIN: Goddamn.

MATT: Clarota and Kima are… (laughs) holding up the back rear end.

LIAM: You know, if you wait five minutes, I can at least take one out.

MATT: As Scanlan approaches, the duergar immediately turns around.

MARISHA: Hi, duergar!

LIAM: Right up behind him– (surprise sound effect) Cut his neck, cut the throat.

MARISHA: I turn into an earth elemental.

MATT: All right,simultaneously, as you approach, the duergar looks behind, gives you a glance, and you can see his eyes, normally pupil-less eyes of the ashy-skinned duergar are now glowing with an odd dull green color that you haven't seen in duergar previously, and he starts rushing towards you. He's going to make a simultaneous round rushing up to you for an attack while you release your two attacks against him and you release your dagger.

MARISHA: Go, twinsies!

TRAVIS: Who hits Scanlan?

MATT: This calls for a music change.

SAM: (sighs) Well, the best laid plans….

LAURA: My first one was an ultimate fail.

MATT: Okay. Good to know. All right, the first duergar swings at you with his war hammer. To you Scanlan, that comes down with a 12.

SAM: 12 versus armor class?

MATT: Versus your armor class, yeah.

SAM: I'm okay!

MATT: You pull back and the giant war hammer swings past you and you duck out of the way. Thankfully, though the duergar are relatively small, you're much smaller, and as a gnome you slip right out of the path of the actual hammer blow. Your first arrow misses, second one you said hits?

LAURA: 25.

MATT: 25 definitively hits. Go ahead and roll damage.

LAURA: Ugh, why? Why? Oh, I'm cursed today! Eight.

MATT: Eight damage.

LAURA: Eight damage.

MATT: All right, so, after he swings past Scanlan, who ducks out of the way, one arrow (whizzing sound effect) just cruises over his head and you hear it scattering and clattering against the rocks in the distance. He looks over in your direction as the second one just grazes his shoulder. You can see a little bit of blood begin to spill, but it doesn't even turn his head towards the wound, he's still just glaring at you angrily while you throw your dagger from behind. Him not even aware of your presence, currently.

LIAM: 20. Natural 20!

TALIESIN: First of the night.

LIAM: There is a magnet inside this die. I should be– Just full disclosure. Okay, so natural 20.

MATT: Yeah. We're buying you new dice next week.

LAURA: Yeah, yeah. Will you buy me new dice as well? Thank you.

MATT: So! As you pull Tiberius back, clutching the front of his snout, keeping him quiet, you pull a dagger out, toss it in the air, catch it and fling it at full speed, striking true. Go ahead and roll damage. With sneak attack bonus. Also multiplied because of the crit.

LIAM: Yes. He's gone, he's gone. Okay, … (mumbles numbers) 47.

MATT: All right. So. As he turns and the arrow strikes off his shoulder and he glares at you, Vex. He pulls back his hammer again looking down at Scanlan, coming down for a blow to basically bash his skull in, but he stops suddenly, as you see this blade protrude from the front of his skull. His glowing eyes fade back to a dull, pale whitish color, and his body slumps onto the ground as your dagger magically returns to your hand from below. Duergar down.

LAURA: I nod to you. Good job.

SAM: I step forward and say– is her name Ulara?

MATT: Ulara. Queen Ulara.

SAM: Queen Ulara. Show yourself! Step out and talk to us. Everyone hold.

MATT: And the rest of you, are you all staying where you are? Are you coming forward with Scanlan?

MARISHA: Oh, you're talking? We're doing a talking thing?

LAURA: Let's step up behind him. I want to step up and make him look more imposing with me and Trinket behind him.

MARISHA: I am– I am going– Hang on, wait, what are you do– what?

LAURA: I want to step up behind Scanlan with a bear behind him, and make him look more imposing.

MARISHA: I'm going to… slink back into the shadows and turn into an earth elemental, and sink into the ground.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: And hopefully they don't see that happen.

MATT: Keyleth… is no longer Keyleth.

LAURA: (laughs) Whoa, you're huge!

MATT: And then– (swoosh sound effects) fades underneath the earth somewhere. Just slips into it, almost like sand through an hourglass, you just vanish beneath the surface of the rock.

TRAVIS: Great way to leave a party.

MATT: Kima steps forward, making a point to step angrily onto the corpse of the duergar. You hear the crunching of bone and metal as she steps over his corpse. Percy, you're approaching as well?

TALIESIN: I'm… staying a little bit back.

MATT: Okay, so about there?

TALIESIN: Yeah, about there.

MATT: All right. Clarota's going to move off to the side… here, and Pike is going to come and get the center point she feels the most applicable to heal.

LIAM: DM?

MATT: Yes?

LIAM: Where on the map is the queen right now?

MATT: You don't see right now.

LIAM: Don't see her.

SAM: She's in the tent. She's in the tent, right?

MATT: Grog, which is right over here.

ORION: I see what's going on and I rub my ring and I go invisible.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: Greater Invisibility.

MATT: All right, so. Tiberius also vanishes from view. You glance over your shoulder, Vax, and notice that Tiberius is just gone. Just (whoosh) vanished. All right. So. As you shouted this out, the secondary duergar now turns and… First off, make a persuasion check. Well, no, in this case intimidation, I think, is what this is going to be.

SAM: Do I roll again?

MATT: I'll say okay, because it is a different skill, so yeah.

ORION: Matt, I'd like to move to the other side.

MATT: You'll get about there with this round.

SAM: 22.

MATT: 22?

LIAM: Fucking love this game.

MATT: All right. As you shout this, the duergar grabs this warpick from his side, looks at you angrily, and begins to step forward, as a giant grizzly bear and the rest of the party filters up behind you in full flying V formation. He puts his pick to his side and yells off his shoulder, “My Queen. We've got company!” As he does, the flaps of the far end of the tent, here, open up. There's a dwarf there, not a duergar, but a dwarf that is standing there to the side, that steps out of the way, and Queen Ulara steps out, as well. You see her angrily look off to the side. “(sighs angrily) Well, then. It appears that we have some business to discuss.” And she begins to step past the front of the fire way. Stopping right next to the fire pit, keeping a good 15-foot distance, with her arms crossed. The dwarf comes and flanks her on this side, and you now see– while I cannot seem to find the figure for the life of me right now to represent it. We'll use this, for the time being. There is an elf also flanking her. Normal looking elf, dressed in what looks like a fine chainmail attire. Longsword at the side. So there's an elf and a dwarf, both flanking.

LIAM: And they're clearly with her.

MATT: They are at her side, like they're ready to defend her.

LIAM: They could be charmed.

SAM: Queen Ulara, if I may have a word. Let us spare each other lots of bloodshed and just have a chat before we fight. Is that all right?

MATT: “Talk, small annoying creature, and perhaps it'll delay the inevitable.”

SAM: My friends and I have come–

LAURA: Hello!

SAM: Hi, yes… We've come from the above world. The normal world, let's say, to your fine kingdom down here below. And we were on a mission. We're a bit of– I don't want to brag, but we're a bit of an elite task force, sent in by kingdoms and kings that you probably haven't heard of way down below, but anyway. I'll spare you.

MATT: Hold that thought just for a second. Percy, go ahead and roll a perception check.

TRAVIS: Oh, shit…. When it's out of the blue like that it's always bad.

TALIESIN: Ten.

MATT: Okay. Continue.

LIAM: Wait. DM. Vax is creeping along the back of that tent and curving around.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: Thank you.

ORION: I'm going to do the earring and go to Scanlan and be like, “Keep it simple, will you? I mean, really, calm down.”

SAM: (laughs) Copy that.

TRAVIS: Yeah, how could you?

SAM: My lady, we have come on a mission. To save someone that you were holding captive. We have completed our mission, and in the melee, in that hovel you called a palace back there, we lost one of our own, and we would like him back. Now, I'll make it very simple because my fellows are begging me to keep things simple. It's a simple binary choice. You can all die right now, or you can turn over our friend and we will probably, probably leave you in peace. I would promise, but I don't make promises to dogs.

TRAVIS: (high-pitched) Ooh! Oh snap!

MARISHA: Oh shit! I move in behind where the pillar is, but in the ground.

MATT: Behind where this pillar is, in the ground?

MARISHA: No, I'm– yeah, I'm there-ish.

MATT: All right. So, at that response, and you're noticing now as you're getting a better glance at the queen, too, the normally white, pale duergar eyes have a strange green glow-ish hue to them. As do the two individuals to the right and left of her. And she just looks you square in the face. “You took my king from me. Came and slayed him in his own throne room. You took something I love, I take something you love. He's mine now. And I'm bringing him to his greater destiny.” At which point, a loud, horrendous streaking sound pierces the ears of everyone in this vicinity. As appearing out of a ripple of energy, a once-invisible mind flayer goes cascading out a mind blast in a cone that just tears through the entire group here. Scanlan, Vex, Pike, as well. Trinket, Percy, go ahead and roll an intelligence saving throw.

TRAVIS: I'll die once I finally come back.

SAM: Saving throw?

MATT: Yes.

SAM: What is that?

MATT: Roll your saving throw for intelligence.

SAM: Okay.

LIAM: Small square near the top upper left hand.

TRAVIS: At least I don't have to roll for intelligence.

SAM: 21.

MATT: All right. Percy.

LAURA: Do I roll for Trinket, too?

TALIESIN: 16.

MATT: Yes, you do. Okay. Vex.

LAURA: 14.

MATT: Okay. And?

LAURA: And Trinket is eight.

MATT: So, you double over, clutching your skull, as the pain is too much to bear, and you find yourself unable to actually draw commands to your muscles for them to function. You are currently stunned.

LAURA: Great.

MATT: Roll for Trinket.

LAURA: Oh, he rolled an eight.

MATT: Trinket falls to the ground with this horrible (bear groan) sound, digging his nose into the actual dirt to try and find a way to escape this piercing mental agony, this psychic damage…

LAURA: It's pretty shitty, you guys. It sucks.

MATT: Both of you guys take 22 points of psychic damage, by the way.

LAURA: Oh, good. Trinket's about to die again.

MARISHA: Who's all stunned?

TALIESIN: Laura, twice.

ORION: Bear and Vex.

MATT: Pike also.

TALIESIN: And Pike.

LIAM: DM, I'm throwing a dagger at the queen.

MATT: Okay. Now we roll initiative, folks, because stuff has begun.

ORION: (fumbling) Can I do something right before that?

MATT: No, essentially this triggers the combat now. This was an immediate occurrence. Now we're going into initiative order.

ORION: Okay.

LIAM: Now, by my saying that, do I get into the initiative order, or does my action come out, my decision come out before?

MATT: I would say for the two that didn't act this turn, you guys can have advantage on the initiative roll because you guys have been holding your actions. So Tiberius, you can also have advantage on your initiative roll, since you guys were holding off.

LIAM: 21.

MATT: 21?

MARISHA: Nice, that's better!

ORION: That's way better than a two.

LAURA: I don't roll anything because I'm stunned?

MATT: You are stunned currently. You still roll initiative so we have the order that you go in.

ORION: 21.

TALIESIN: 22.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: Oh are we doing this?

MATT: We are.

LIAM: It's on like Tron.

LAURA: I've got a 13.

MATT: Guys, hang on. So 20 to 15?

TALIESIN: 22.

SAM: 18.

MATT: 18, all right, wow. We got some good initiative rolls, guys, good job!

MARISHA: 16 here.

MATT: Okay. 15 to ten?

LAURA: Oh, me. 13.

MATT: There we go.

LIAM: You play stunned well.

LAURA: I'm not a victim. I'm going to kick butt as soon as I wake up.

MATT: Oh, yeah. Kima also fell stunned to that, unfortunately. All right, that brings us to…. I think that's everyone's initiative, right?

LIAM: 21 over here.

MATT: Yeah, yeah everyone's in. All right, cool. So, top of the round. Percy, you're up first.

TALIESIN: We need earth elemental stats if you know where they are, by the way.

MATT: Oh, did you not print them out? Monster Manual.

TALIESIN: Monster Manual.

MATT: Here we go. (funny accent) See, this comes in handy more often than you'd think.

TALIESIN: Yeah. But while we're looking that up, I'm basically going to pull my gun, I'm going to fire four times into the face of that awful, awful screaming bastard.

MATT: Of the, the mind flayer over here?

TALIESIN: Yeah, the mind flayer.

MATT: Okay, so you whip around, he's there in your face, go ahead and make– You're using your action surge to fire two additional times, you said?

TALIESIN: Yeah.

MATT: Okay, wow, four rounds. Go for an attack.

TALIESIN: First attack with Pepperbox is 13?

MATT: 13? Unfortunately misses. Form shifts (whooshing sounds), and you can feel the psychic energy of its oppressive mental force, causing your hand to miss its aim with each pull of the trigger.

TALIESIN: All right fire shot for 19.

MATT: 19 does hit.

TALIESIN: That's my fire shot… so that's…

TRAVIS: Put it on him, Percy, let's go.

TALIESIN: Oh my god, this sucks! Eight points of damage. What is this about?

MATT: Okay. Third attack?

TALIESIN: Third attack.

MATT: Spin the barrel again on the Pepperbox (gunshot).

TALIESIN: Natural 20.

TRAVIS: Get on it!

LAURA: Murder him!

TALIESIN: That's 11 points of damage.

MARISHA: Is it doubled?

MATT: All righty. That's doubled with the critical?

TALIESIN: That's 2d10. I double the dice, right?

MATT: Yeah.

TALIESIN: Yeah.

MATT: Or roll and double the dice number, but that's fine. Okay.

TALIESIN: So that's that. And now I'm going to take a sharpshooter bonus, so… Oh, that sucks. That's 11, that doesn't hit.

MATT: Unfortunately. So the first one hits, the second one actually clips part of its chest and you can see, as it tries to use its psychic abilities to resist the bullet, it still pierces its chest in the side. Missing everything vital, still causing it to (makes painful hissing sound), sucks in the air for a moment.

TALIESIN: That was a terrible roll. I'm going to use some movement to dodge left to get out of the way of that guy.

MATT: Okay. So going this way?

TALIESIN: Yeah, I'm going to go… Yeah, about there.

MATT: Okay, cool. Probably should get out the laser pointers.

TRAVIS: I'll bring him one.

SAM: Hey, is Grog stone?

LIAM: Grog's tied. Grog is held by iron bands. He's down.

TRAVIS: Grog's been hitting the peace pipe.

SAM: He's unconscious.

MATT: You guys don't know; you haven't seen him yet.

LIAM: I saw him, you described it to me last week. He's in iron bands held on a cart.

LAURA: But he's awake, right?

MATT: Yeah, on a cart. You haven't checked.

MARISHA: Iron bands?

LIAM: Yeah, he's tied down.

MARISHA: He's on the whole cart though, right?

MATT: Tiberius. You're up next.

ORION: Great. I peek over the little thing, and I go, “Ooh!” and I throw a fireball from my ring.

MATT: (laughs) Okay, where are you throwing it?

ORION: Oh, right in the juicy spot of those three.

MATT: Right here?

ORION: Yeah.

MATT: Okay. So. As they're all sitting there, looking ready to pounce for this series of battle, all of a sudden there's a slight streak of reddish energy in the distance as you all are watching. It looks almost like the fire pit behind them just explodes in this giant fiery ball of red, angry magical fury. So go ahead and roll your 8d6 damage.

ORION: (mumbling numbers) I'm missing d6s.

TALIESIN: There's two more.

ORION: Wonderful. (mumbles) That's… 31 damage.

MATT: 31 points of damage, okay. Queen Ulara you notice, as the duergar are generally considered– as this blasts in this area as well– both her and the duergar make their saving throw; they have magic resistance innately against it.

TRAVIS: Against magic?

MATT: Yeah, they're hardy creatures, man. However! The elf on this side ends up being thrown to the side and its entire body gets thrown about 20-30 feet across from the force of the explosion, landing on the ground lifeless, next to you. (skidding noise) On the ground, a burnt cinder. The dwarf takes the brunt of it as well. Appears to still be alive, but looks very horribly burned and is looking at its hands now like (pained grunting sound). Barely standing.

ORION: And then I spend two sorcerer points to (crackling sound effect) form an ice knife.

MATT: Before we get to that point, Grog, you also take that damage.

TRAVIS: Oh. How many points?

LIAM: He's a freaking sponge. He'll be fine.

ORION: Why?

MATT: Because you said you threw it in the fire, there? Grog's right there. On a cart.

ORION: I said the juicy spot of those three! I knew Grog was there. Of course I wouldn't throw it there.

TRAVIS: I can take it.

ORION: Okay, fine.

(all laugh)

MATT: I pointed here.

ORION: Yeah, but… I thought– I don't know.

MATT: Be specific next time! But yeah, that's okay. He can take it.

MARISHA: We're down all of our laser pointers.

ORION: And I throw that, right in the back of Queeny's head.

MATT: Okay. All right, go for it. So as you coalesce this arcane energy into this blue, cold, freezing plume of… moisture in your hand, it forms into this giant jagged blade of ice, and you chuck it in a straight line. Go ahead and roll a d20 plus your spell attack modifier.

MARISHA: Get it. Get some.

ORION: 19.

MATT: 19 does hit, even with her mage armor.

ORION: Sweet. And then that's 1d10. So that's a ten. And then… it (exploding sound effect) shatters, and then does– where the fuck is it– 2d6 damage as well.

MATT: Okay, to her and everyone– Go for it.

ORION: In a five-foot radius. So yeah…

MATT: Right.

ORION: And that guy's like right next to her, right?

MATT: Yeah.

TRAVIS: (whispering) Hey, Matt. How much damage did I take?

MATT: What was the damage on the fireball?

ORION: 31.

MATT: 31? 31 points of fire damage.

TRAVIS: Cool.

ORION: Cool, and that's four points of damage to both of them.

LAURA: Are you dead?

MATT: To both of them? All right. Well, for one, four damage is enough, as the shards of ice from the back of Ulara's torso explode into this spray of jagged ice chunks. It pierces continuously the right side of this dwarf, who then falls to the ground, grasping at his wounds and trying to stand to his feet before falling over unconscious right there.

ORION: And I have Greater Invisibility, so I'm still invisible and I just peek back behind the rock.

MATT: (singing) Mysterious fireball, ice dagger source. Okay. You come to consciousness, in extreme pain as your entire body is immersed briefly in flame.

TRAVIS: (painful roaring)

MATT: We'll get to that in a second. Vex. Vax, sorry.

LIAM: Okay, I'm going to use my feat, Cunning Action, for one extra action per turn of combat, use for either dash, disengage, or hide. So I'm going to double distance and go one… two… three, four, five– I still can't see her– six, maybe… seven, eight, nine, ten. Stop right here by Clarota. (over enunciating) Clarota– Clarota! And dagger, dagger at this jerkface over here.

MATT: Right here?

LIAM: Yep.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: That was stealthed, by the way.

MATT: Right, roll a stealth check.

LIAM: All right. Okay, and I'm going to use Luck. Okay, so stealth is 23?

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: And he hasn't gone yet, so for the assassinate feat for rogues, if he hasn't gone yet, this is a critical hit.

MATT: In theory, combat already began when he attacked the rest of your party.

LIAM: Okay.

MATT: Combat's begun. Sorry.

LIAM: The feat says if you have the jump, if you go before the person's gone, but we can talk about that later…

MATT: Correct, but they've already attacked half your party with the mind blast, so in theory the battle's already begun.

LIAM: All right. Okay, so keen dagger flying through the air…

MATT: All right.

LIAM: Oh, I didn't hit to– Okay, so that hits. 16 plus– 27.

MATT: That definitively hits, yes.

LIAM: Okay, so three… plus (mumbles)

LAURA: Kill him.

LIAM: (muttering numbers) 36 total.

MATT: 36 points of damage. All right. So, the mind flayer, which is… After it finishes a mind blast, you can see it beginning to eye what its next target would be. As Percy goes running off to the side, it looks over at its three freshly-stunned prey and begins to lumber towards what looks to be either Pike or Vex. But before it gets a chance to advance though, (whistling sound) out of nowhere your dagger (impact sound) pierces it in its shoulder. It looks at it and it grasps for it. As its hand tries to pull the dagger out, the dagger disappears in a plume of black shadow energy back into your hand as you throw the other dagger.

LIAM: Oh, sorry, asswipe! Okay, that is a 19.

MATT: 19 does also hit.

LIAM: And that is eight damage.

MATT: All right. The other dagger, the creature actually puts up a little bit of a psychic field for a second and it stops its momentum. It does still manage to strike it, but with nowhere near the damage you were hoping it would. Cool, that ends your turn. That brings us to Scanlan.

SAM: Okay, so all that's remaining on the battlefield is the queen and the mind flayer?

MATT: The mind flayer, the queen, and this duergar here that has not acted yet.

SAM: All right. (sighs) I'm going to just bum rush the queen.

TRAVIS: Yes! I mean…

SAM: And just dive at her. Just dive full, head-on, straight for her and bear hug her with Banishment.

ORION: Oh yeah, baby!

MATT: (laughing) Okay!

ORION: You know you can cast that from a distance?

SAM: No, you have to– it's touch.

ORION: Is it? Oh!

MATT: Yeah, it's a touch spell.

SAM: It's touch.

MATT: All right. So. What's your spell DC? I assume you're using your hand cone?

SAM: I do most things through that.

MATT: As you charge forward, you pull out your enchanted hand cone and shout the incantation towards her with an angry glare.

SAM: Ooh, get lost, motherfucker!

(all laugh)

MATT: It had a DC of 19 for that?

SAM: Yeah.

MATT: Okay, even with her spell resistance, she does not resist it.

SAM: It's not you it's me.

(all laugh)

MATT: Is it an intelligence or wisdom save?

SAM: Oh. I don't know things. Target, plane of existence, banishment… I don't know. Where does it say?

MATT: It should say what saving throw it is.

SAM: Find it.

(all laugh)

MATT: I will do this for you. On a charisma saving throw or be banished. So, if it was on anything but a charisma saving throw, she would have shrugged it. Charisma, she does not have in spades. As you reach out, she pulls back and you see her beginning to form this crackling bolt of energy you've seen once before in the throne room that shot out and hit multiple members of your party once for a severe amount of damage. This would have been a very dangerous round if you hadn't connected with her right in front of her clavicle. She looks at you with this look of confusion and completely caught-off-guard frustration before her entire form (sucking sound) blinks out of existence and is no longer visible on the board.

LIAM: Bard ass!

SAM: Yes!

TRAVIS: Get the hell out of there (laughs)

SAM: Do I get my bonus?

MATT: Yeah!

SAM: I'm going to give inspiration to Grog because he needs it.

MATT: All right. So Grog, as the flames die down, you look over and watch Scanlan rush up and completely, as far as you know, disintegrate the duergar queen who took you and has been torturing you these past few days–

TRAVIS: Wow.

(all laugh)

MATT: With that, he looks over to you and gives you a little wink and a smile. Go ahead and take an inspiration dice, which for him is now a d10.

LAURA: An upgrade!

TRAVIS: Heck yeah.

MATT: So you can add that inspiration die to any ability checks, any skill checks, saving throws.

SAM: For instance, busting through iron bars.

TRAVIS: Thank you, thank you.

MATT: All right, well, it would be Ulara's turn. She's going to go ahead and attempt to make her saving throw. Does not make it. Still somewhere in some other plane that you're unaware of.

SAM: She's in a better place.

MATT: Keyleth, it's your turn.

MARISHA: All right, I'm going to phase through the ground because I can. And pop up right there next to Grog.

MATT: All right. (crashing sound) Grog, you, all of sudden, as you look over from Scanlan with this smiling face, this giant mountain of rock and earth just lumbers up out of the ground.

TRAVIS: (gasps) Oh shit!

MARISHA: And in rock speak, I say, “Grog it's okay. It's Keyleth”

MATT: You hear (makes deep gargled sounds)

TRAVIS: (screams in terror)

MATT: (laughs)

MARISHA: I still don't really grasp that you can't–

MATT: It's your first time doing elemental form; you're still trying to figure it out.

MARISHA: Seeing that he's still tied up, I'm going to pick up the whole crate and put him over my– no I'm going to football carry him like this.

MATT: Okay. (laughs)

SAM: Is he on something?

MATT: He's strapped to a giant cart.

SAM: She's carrying the whole thing?

MATT: Yeah.

SAM: Awesome.

MATT: Because earth elemental.

SAM: Awesome.

MATT: So you're there, now you still have about– what's the speed of?

MARISHA: 30.

MATT: 30. So you've got about, say, ten more squares, or I'm sorry ten more feet you can go.

MARISHA: I'm going to start football rushing that way.

MATT: This way? All right, one, two, all right there we go.

MARISHA: Get the fuck out!

MATT: You're now being carried by this giant lumbering earth elemental that is just bringing you under its arm. Great! Vex? Do you make your saving throw? Intelligence.

LAURA: Plus intelligence?

MATT: Intelligence saving throw, that should be at the top.

LAURA: 23!

MATT: 23. Using your mind, you shrug off the remainder of the ability. That does end your turn, but you're no longer stunned, which is nice.

LAURA: That's great, that's the end of my turn?

MATT: That's the end of your turn.

LAURA: Do I roll it for Trinket too?

MATT: Yes, Trinket as well, thank you.

LAURA: Little Trinket gets the little bitty dice. Oh, I don't think he got it. No, he still rolled an eight.

MATT: Yeah, so Trinket's still on the ground, slowly digging his nose into the dirt, trying to find a way to his–

LAURA: Oh! Does that mean he takes more damage?

MATT: No more damage, but currently is unable to function.

LIAM: He's dreaming of honey.

LAURA: Okay. He's dreaming of pain.

MATT: Yeah, very bad news. Okay. That brings us to Pike, who's also going to try and make her saving throw. Fails it, unfortunately. Pike dropped her shield, dropped her mace, and is clutching the side of her head, screaming silently as the pain is wracking her brain from the inside. That brings us to this duergar, who's going to rush over to the one who just banished his queen and attempt to– his physical form begins to swell with strength and frustration. The duergar swings at you with his war pick. That is…

SAM: “(singing) Oh, don't hit me!” I cast a little count, cutting– what is it?

MATT: Cutting Words?

SAM: Cutting Words.

MATT: Okay. So it's a 16. Go ahead and roll your d10 number. It's a d10 now.

SAM: That's d10?

MATT: It's a d10 now. You leveled up, yeah!

SAM: I don't even– I've never rolled a d10 before! (laughs)

MATT: Now you have!

SAM: This is a d10?

MATT: Yep, so it's a 16.

SAM: It was a four.

MATT: It was a four, so it takes that down from a 16 to a 12, which does miss.

SAM: He misses!

(all laugh)

MATT: So as he rushes towards you–

SAM: (singing) No, don't hit me!

MATT: He stops for a second, confused. He puts the war pick down for a second like, “Wait– argh! (groans) You gnome!“ Doesn't know why he listened to you and is equally frustrated with himself now as he is you. (laughs)

TRAVIS: So good.

MATT: All right. That ends the duergar's turn. That brings us to–

LIAM: Here comes the illithid.

MATT: Not yet. This is going to be, Kima is going to try and make her saving throw. Kima does make it! Does shrug off the effect. Turns around angrily, holding the greatsword that you gave her, staring off at the mind flayer right there. Clarota, however, is going to go ahead and turn this way. Coalesce a giant ball of electrical energy into his hand, and release an arcing blast of lightning energy towards this mind flayer, who does make its saving throw. However, it's still a nice 8d6 lightning damage.

SAM: Do they know each other? Are they friends?

TALIESIN: Not anymore.

TRAVIS: Soulmates.

LAURA: I think that guy dated Clarota's ex-girlfriend.

MATT: So, 20 points of lightning damage. As the blue energy arcs off, and you see it grounds itself on the incline of this tunnel you guys, have, heading down, the mind flayer visibly is burned, charred, wounded. It looks really really rough. That ends Clarota's turn, Kima's turn. Back to the top of the round. The mind flayer looks at its certain circumstance. Puts its hands together like this, it seems to concentrate…

ORION: I see it, I cast Counterspell! (fwoosh)

MATT: Okay. All right, it's a reflex. Counterspell in this edition is so good.

LAURA: That's great.

MATT: All right so… this would be Counterspell.

LIAM: Come on Tibs. Tibber-hoods.

MATT: All right, Counterspell, so make an ability check, so add a d20 plus five to it.

SAM: That's nothing, that's no numbers.

MARISHA: Oh, there we go.

SAM: That's a good number.

ORION: What is that? 22.

MATT: 22? That'll do it. So as this entity you've seen before, they tend to like create this small localized portal into some other plane, and then like step through and vanish. You see it begins to coalesce the same arcane energy, and for a moment you see a spark of some sort of door beginning to open. As Tiberius steps from behind the rock, releases this torrent of sparkling arcane energy that closes the gate entirely and the mind flayer for a second looks confused before it, across the way to wherever it came from and sees nothing.

LIAM: Oh, so sorry.

TRAVIS: Are you still invisible?

TALIESIN: So sad, so sad.

MATT: And is going to turn tail and run.

LAURA: (gasp) Just running?

TRAVIS: With his feet?

LAURA: Can I shoot him?

SAM: He ran?

MATT: Well, yeah essentially levitating away.

TRAVIS: Does he have a goofy run?

MATT: It's more, its a gliding. it's a (whoosh) About five or six inches off the ground.

MARISHA: Shoot her!

MATT: Percy, you're up.

LAURA: Shoot him, Percy!

TALIESIN: Okay, I'm going to take a step towards– who's buggering Scanlan over there?

MATT: A duergar.

TALIESIN: It's a duergar? I'm just going to take a shot at him really quick.

SAM: Don't hit me!

MATT: Okay.

TALIESIN: Not going to hit you.

MATT: Hard to see him right now; there's a big tent in the way, if you want to take a step forward, continue moving.

TALIESIN: I'll take a step forward, I'm going to continue moving, this is going to be a running shot.

MATT: Okay. So, as you turn, pull your gun off to the side, (explosion) offhand fire–

TALIESIN: 18?

MATT: 18 does hit.

SAM: I don't like guns.

TALIESIN: That's– don't go anywhere. That's nine damage.

MATT: Nine damage, all right.

TALIESIN: And I'm going to shoot again.

MATT: All right.

TALIESIN: 18.

MATT: 18. That also hits.

LIAM: Bad News.

TALIESIN: Eight damage. Bad News has not come out yet! This is just my little Pepperbox.

MATT: All right, so, as you turn the corner, you fire once, take another step forward, go (click) click over the next barrel, fire a second time. The duergar which was attacking you– you see part of it's still burnt from the fireball which was tossed the first round– he's frustrated and angry that you caused him to somehow lower his guard when he attacked you last.

SAM: Yeah!

(all laugh)

MATT: You see him gearing up for another two-handed strike down at this tiny gnome character in front of him. The first blow hits the war pick, knocking it out of his hands. He looks over, confused, at you as the second blast hits him right in the side of the face, completely destroying this side of his head entirely. This wet gurgle as the duergar slumps to the ground, almost on top of you, but you step out of the way as his body (boof) hits the ground right there.

LAURA: Nice. Nice, Percy!

TALIESIN: Bam.

LIAM: Where does he get such wonderful toys?!

TALIESIN: I make them!

MATT: That's Percy's turn. Tiberius?

SAM: You want to chase them?

ORION: I'm going to slink my way all the way behind the other rock.

MATT: Over here?

ORION: Towards everybody, closer. Yeah, back, there you go.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: I'm going to… Yeah, screw it, I'll do another Fireball at the illithid going away. Where do you think you're going? (fwoosh)

MATT: So, as you fire this beam over here, it detonates in the distance, safely far enough away from the party. Go ahead and roll damage for that fireball. As the mind flayer that is drifting away glances over its shoulder, you see its greenish glowing eyes go wide for a second, cartoon-style, "Oh, shit!”

TRAVIS: Did you go, “Fireball!” as you do it? Hadouken!

MATT: And, with its advantage against the spell– it's a dexterity save, correct?

ORION: Yeah, so that's–

MATT: Doesn't make it.

ORION: 19.

MATT: 19, all right, 19 damage?

ORION: Yep.

MATT: Okay, as the mind flayer's drifting away, you guys see this arc of red, beaming energy (whoosh) off in the distance. (explosion) You see rocks cascade off the top of the wall, hitting the ground with a force as the entire tunnel shakes and rocks. As the smoke and the flames dissipate, all you see is this pile of blackened creature on the ground from where the mind flayer once stood.

TRAVIS: Oh, peace out! Mind gobbler.

LAURA: Is that everybody's?

SAM: Fellows! Gather around. She might come back at any moment and we should be here to surround her when she comes back.

LAURA: Okay, yeah.

SAM: And someone get Grog out of that thing!

ORION: Oh, crap, I forgot about that one.

LAURA: Yeah, how do we get Grog out?

MATT: Grog.

TRAVIS: What?

MATT: While they're all doing this, what do you want to do?

TRAVIS: Well, am I still chained up to the cart?

MATT: Yeah, these iron bands are across your entire body.

LAURA: Being carried by an earth elemental.

TRAVIS: Excuse me, giant rock thing. Could you perhaps get me out of this shit?

LIAM: I start hiking back towards Grog.

LAURA: Pike and Trinket, are they still stunned, or are they… better?

MATT: They've shrugged it off by now.

LAURA: Okay. Then I run over and try to see what I can do.

MATT: Ulara still can't make her saving throw for the life of her, even with resistance.

LAURA: Can I go try to mess with the things on–

MATT: Oh, yeah. As you guys approach, and begin making your way up to the front here, grab these duergar.

ORION: And I'll move on the other side of that rock so I can see better and have line of sight.

MATT: Over here?

ORION: No, on that side, yeah.

MATT: Okay. All right, so. As the rest of you all slowly trudge up and gather around this vicinity.

LAURA: Grog! Are you hurt?

TRAVIS: I can't tell yet.

TALIESIN: I'm keeping my distance.

MATT: There?

TALIESIN: Yeah.

MATT: All right, so.

TRAVIS: I'm still in this wonderful therapeutic chair.

MATT: So you go ahead and you try and pull the bars off? Is that what you're doing? What are you doing?

TRAVIS: Are they bars?

MATT: They're iron bands that surround you.

MARISHA: Don't want to hurt him.

TRAVIS: But it's a wooden cart? Is it a wooden cart?

LAURA: Maybe bust the wood on the bottom.

TRAVIS: Or just smash the cart.

SAM: Or he can pick a lock.

LIAM: It's what I do.

MARISHA: Oh, is there a lock on the bars? Yeah.

MATT: Yeah, there's an intricate lock mechanism.

MARISHA: Try that first before I suplex Grog.

MATT: All right, so, so the earth elemental lumbers forth and presents the cart on the ground in front of you (impact sound). One of the wheels (breaking noise).

TRAVIS: Thank you.

MATT: Cracks a little bit in the process.

LIAM: “Give me a little space. Let me look at this.” Can I detect traps on his bands?

SAM: Checking for traps?! She could come back at any second, hurry up!

LAURA: I keep my arrow notched.

LIAM: That's a 17.

LAURA: In case she does come back.

MATT: 17?

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: Okay. They appear to be just general locks.

LIAM: And are there locks contraptions on them?

MATT: There is a lock on them, yes. So go ahead and make your–

LIAM: 19.

MATT: 19. (tink) The band that's part way across the waist opens freely on the hinge on the one side.

TRAVIS: Was there just one?

MATT: Yeah, that was the one.

TRAVIS: (groans in relief) Oh my god!

MATT: So go ahead and make an athletics check. I mean, there's multiple bands around you. Across your shoulders, your torso, your legs, your ankles.

LIAM: I'm going to move on to the next one.

TRAVIS: 25.

LIAM: And a 25 on my lock pick.

MATT: Okay, you get a second band. You rolled a 25? And Marisha, do you want to go ahead and make an athletics check as well? Or that would be a strength check for you.

MARISHA: For what?

MATT: For your form, your elemental form, to try and pull the bands off of Grog.

MARISHA: Okay.

MATT: Unless you want to do something else.

TALIESIN: I'm going to recommend to Pike that she do a bit of healing.

LAURA: Oh, Pike! Can you heal Trinket. He's really almost dead.

SAM: Is Pike okay?

MATT: Pike comes over and spends a 3rd-level healing spell.

MARISHA: I failed.

LAURA: You failed what?

TALIESIN: Life. Oh wow! Yeah, you did.

MARISHA: Strength check.

MATT: Okay, Trinket heals 21.

LAURA: Oh, good.

LIAM: Vax is moving to the next band. That's a 24.

TRAVIS: I got a 25, does that not help?

MATT: Yeah, between the two of you, over the next few seconds or so, you pick the next one and with that remaining push, you force the rest of the bands off. Grog, you make your way up to your feet.

TRAVIS: (groans in relief)

MATT: There we go! At that point in time, there's a slight ripple in the space right before this fire pit, and in that place Ulara, Queen Ulara, reappears again.

SAM: Hold her!

LAURA: I've been waiting for it.

MARISHA: Can I grab her?

ORION: Wait, can I do something? Can we react to this?

MATT: Yeah.

ORION: I see it and I cast Hold Person.

MATT: Okay. All right. As you finish the spell, you can see this glow of yellowish holding energy, almost like these mystical shackles, begin to tighten around her and then fade, unaffected.

LAURA: I release an arrow!

SAM: I also cast Hold Person.

MATT: Okay, so you go ahead and loose your arrow. So go ahead and roll for your attack. All right.

LAURA: 29.

MATT: 29? Okay, that does hit. You can see now, the second set of shackles spins around her, she brings her hand up like this and they just scatter around her, resisting a second Hold Person. Now all her saving throws are coming through.

MARISHA: Can I just grab her as an earth elemental. Just like (mumbles with a deep voice).

MATT: If you want to.

MARISHA: Yeah.

MATT: So, damage on the attack?

LAURA: I Hunter's Mark her, as well.

MATT: Oh there you go. See that, chatroom?

LAURA: What is that? 13?

LIAM: 12.

LAURA: 12! Plus… That's 16 total.

MATT: 16 damage, all right.

TALIESIN: I'm going to take a headshot with Bad News.

LIAM: Wait!

TALIESIN: Oh, are you doing something?

LAURA: We need to talk to her.

TALIESIN: Okay.

MARISHA: I bear hug her.

MATT: Okay, so go ahead and make an athletics check.

MARISHA: Athletics, I don't have that.

MATT: I know, it's just a strength check, then. Roll a d20 and add your strength modifier.

MARISHA: Ooh, that's better! 23.

MATT: 23. You bound up behind her and as she looks over her shoulder, the arrow piercing her shoulder. She's looking pretty rough, you can see the blood beginning to pool underneath her robe there. Her eyes go wide.

LAURA: It would be in your best interest to not struggle.

MATT: At which point, the giant arms go (impact noise) behind her and the earth elemental lifts her off her feet. (groans in pain) You can see her now, her feet dangling angrily in the air. A couple of seconds pass before she, “(pants) All right. So, let's make a deal, shall we?”

LAURA: (laughs) You're in no place to negotiate.

SAM: We have everything that we have come here for. What can you possibly offer us that we don't already have?

MATT: “Valid point. What purpose do I serve? You should let me go.”

SAM: Let you go?! I tried to talk to you and you almost tried to get us killed!

LIAM: Vox Machina, our purposes here are done, but Lady Kima, she has further to go, and I am curious, your Highness, if you know anything about this K'Varn chap or gal or thing? We have heard his or her name. They seem to be famous in these parts. I was wondering if you know anything about K'Varn.

MATT: Are you rolling Persuasion for this?

LIAM: Yes, I am. So well. That's a two.

LAURA: So bad.

MATT: She goes, “I know many things.” And she leans forward a little bit and then spits right in your face.

LAURA: Oh! Wonderful. Clarota, do you want to suck her mind?

MARISHA: I tighten my grip on her a bit.

LIAM: Vex'ahlia, would you come up and talk to this–

LAURA: I'm already here.

MATT: Clarota, at which steps forward and brings his hand up.

MARISHA: Oh, that's true. We don't need her, we just need her brain.

MATT: As Clarota steps forward, putting his hand out, this voice echoes through all of your minds communally. “Now… tell us what you know.” And you see his eyes flicker with a strange blue energy.

LIAM: Yeah, Professor X.

TALIESIN: Man's got to eat.

MATT: And you see Ulara's eyes glaze over and fill with the same blue arcane energy that Clarota was briefly having drift out of his eyes. Ulara stops struggling and the mouth goes into this weird grin for a second and just calmly says, “Liberation. Liberation is what it brings us. Liberation from physical limitation. Liberation from the pain of the light.” And she looks up as she says that. “We all shall rise. K'Varn, the Guiding Darkness. The sun shall hold no sway and we shall walk the surface once again.”

ORION: What is all this poppycock?!

LAURA: What is K'Varn?

MATT: “K'Varn came to us, showed us how through unification we could be better than we ever were.”

LAURA: I didn't ask what he did, I asked what he is.

MATT: “K'Varn–” At which point, there's a shudder in her body and her eyes go from this strange blue color to this strange swimming black that covers the entirety of each eye. At which point, she shakes for a second. Her shoulders shift and you clutch her in your arms. As you do, you see the blackness now has that same green glow that the rest of them had, but it's framing the pools of shadow that her eyes have become. Her jaw falls slack for a second and this voice comes through. “Ah, there! (chuckles) There we are. I can see you all so clearly.”

ORION: Not me!

MATT: “You'd be surprised, dragonborn.”

(all gasp)

ORION: You're pretty good.

(all laugh)

MATT: “Word has reached my ears, but to see you, to look upon you, is everything. Come. You are close, yes? Come to me, as my guests. I invite you. The temple doors are open. I'd like to see you in person.”

ORION: (stammers) Can you be more specific? Like, do we go left, or right, or… specific.

MATT: “You're already on the right path. Come to me. You are my treasured guests.” At which point, the blackness in the eyes begins to intensify and begin to spill like black tears from the face. Her body shudders before the back convulses, and then falls limp, a little bit of smoke rising from the mouth.

LAURA: I check her pulse.

MATT: She has definitely given up the ghost.

SAM: Try to heal her?

LAURA: Does she have anything awesome on that we can take?

TALIESIN: I wasn't going to say it.

SAM: You're looting her already?!

TALIESIN: I was waiting for someone else to say it.

LIAM: What a mercenary.

LAURA: Is she dead? Can we take her outfit?

(laughs)

MATT: All right, so as you guys glance around you find– other than the usual assortment of objects you find are the armor the duergar, the Emberhold, make.

LIAM: Vax'ildan is going to go pick at the charred remains of the illithid.

SAM: I'm going into the tent to look.

ORION: I want to check out the queen.

MATT: Okay. You go and check out the charred remains. They are charred. They are remains. There is what looks to be about 86 gold on the body, but most anything of use has been charred or destroyed. There is the remnants of a breastplate that is burned over that most of the mind flayers use as a basic form of protection. As you inspect her body, as the earth elemental drops her (boof) with a thud to the ground–

ORION: I rolled an 18 for arcana, and you know I wanted to check for–

MATT: Okay. You do notice there's a silver circlet across her forehead that does give off a magical aura. She carries on her one viscous, reddish potion that is familiar to you in the healing accoutrement of various potions you've had in the past. It is a potion of greater healing.

LAURA: Yeah, and we haven't used the yellow potion yet.

TRAVIS: And nobody ever drank that?

ORION AND LAURA: No.

MATT: There is another potion that has almost a blue, frosty color to it as you take the vial from where it sits in the rest. The actual glass that contains the liquid has a layer of frost crystals around it.

TALIESIN: I'm going to remember that you're the one who suggests drinking random, yellow liquids and I'm going to bring you a vial of yellow liquid. I'm just saying.

MATT: Make an investigation check.

LIAM: Me? Yeah, sorry.

LAURA: Can I also check– We already checked the queen? You already checked the queen?

MATT: He's almost done with checking the queen.

LAURA: Can we check the elf and the dwarf that we knocked out, as well?

MATT: Yes, you can.

TRAVIS: And can I ask Pike to heal me, because I look like a game of tic-tac-toe?

MATT: (laughs) Okay.

LAURA: I know, we should check on Grog.

TRAVIS: Oh, no, don't think of me, please. I've only been fucking missing for two weeks.

LAURA: You're standing up? I'm so happy you're back with us.

MATT: What'd you roll on investigation?

LIAM: 13.

MATT: 13? Okay. You can't seem to find anything out of the remains of the mind flayer, unfortunately.

MARISHA: I drop my earth elemental form.

MATT: Okay. (shoomf) The earth around your form seems to crumble, like a layer of rock. It hits the ground and dissolves into the stone beneath you.

LAURA: See? I told you it was Keyleth.

MARISHA: Were you watching, Grog? Grog, you weren't watching.

TRAVIS: No, totally was. It was amazing what you did. Could you do it again?

MARISHA: After we take a short rest.

SAM: Anything in the tent?

MATT: You check inside. It looks like there's some traveling blankets, some furs. You do also find a small case that contains a bunch of empty vials. There is one filled vial. A very large vial.

SAM: Oh. Superior healing. All right. Great.

MATT: And you find–

TRAVIS: (whispers) Can you fucking heal me, please? Can you please heal me?

SAM: What the hell?

ORION: I place the circlet on my head.

LAURA AND SAM: What is it?

LIAM: Probably a cursed item.

MATT: You can't have it with an Ioun Stone either, by the way. It's one or the other.

ORION: (stammering) I thought that was a…

MATT: It's a head slot.

ORION: And for Ioun Stones I can have up to three in the head slot?

MATT: Correct.

ORION: Okay.

MARISHA: Maybe give it to Scanlan. Scanlan, do you have anything in your head slot?

SAM: “Just my cunning wit!” I don't even know what a head slot is.

LAURA: It's where a hat goes.

ORION: Then for the time being, I take off the Ioun Stone and I (fzzt) dissipate it and… put it on.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: Oh, can you share?

ORION: This essentially allows me to–

MATT: Anyone who wears it.

ORION: (stammering) Anyone who wears it can maintain two concentration spells for two rounds.

LAURA: Oh, that's great for you.

MATT: It's great for a lot of people.

TRAVIS: Could you do that cheer where I feel a lot better after you do it?

MATT: Pike comes up and says, “I'm sorry! I'm sorry, Grog,” goes over and places her hands upon you. As she's about to, Kima pushes her aside, and says, “I've got this.” Walks up, and you can see this divine glowing energy. It fills her hands. She reaches out and touches you and this warmth fills– this warmth fills your torso. Using her Lay On Hands ability, Lady Kima of Vord heals you for 38 points of damage.

LAURA: Did I find anything on the other people?

TRAVIS: Thank you, Kima.

MATT: You look through the bodies. It looks like most of their adornments, other than the natural armor and weapons they have, nothing of particular interest. Make an investigation check.

LAURA: Oh, wait, I get to go twice because it's Underdark. That was great. 16.

MATT: Okay. 16? Yeah, you're not able to really pull anything from their bodies, unfortunately. However, after Kima finishes healing you, Kima walks over to the dwarf corpse as you're inspecting it and gives it a look-over and shakes her head.

LAURA: What do you see, Kima?

MATT: (sighs) “This was one of my companions.”

LAURA: (gasps) Oh, no.

MATT: “Well, judging by the scars across his body, he had already been made a thrall of one of the illithid. Most likely the one that we finished back there.”

SAM: Killed her friend?

LAURA: He was already a thrall.

MATT: “There wasn't much to really bring him back at this point, I fear.”

LAURA: Is that what they would've done to Grog?

MATT: And as you guys all look at Grog now, you can see him, he has hundreds upon hundreds of small scars across his body: fresh wounds that have just barely sealed. It looks like they've done a number on him with a bunch of small blades, hooks, razors– it's hard to tell. But he is coated with small cuts.

TRAVIS: It's been interesting.

LAURA: You look really manly now.

TRAVIS: Now?

MARISHA: (laughs) Have we done some healing? Has healing been done?

MATT: You guys can short rest if you want to heal yourselves with your hit dice.

LIAM: This is the time for an intermission.

LAURA: Oh, it is?

LIAM: Yeah.

MARISHA: Is it? What time is it?

ORION: It's 8:24.

SAM: It's only just begun.

LIAM: (singing) We've only just begun. (speaking) Because we went right into battle.

MARISHA: I wanted to talk to my team. Can we talk now or talk after break? It's up to you.

SAM: Let's talk now.

LIAM: Vax is walking off into the distance to urinate on a stalagmite or stalactite, whatever's the one on the ground.

MARISHA: Well, we'll wait for Vax to get back.

SAM: We'll bring him up to speed later.

TRAVIS: Just talk loudly.

MARISHA: Well, I don't– Where's Kima?

LAURA: She's right here.

MATT: Kima's with you. Kima's still looking over the body of the dwarf that's fallen.

TRAVIS: Speak!

LIAM: Oh, that's a relief! Oh!

LAURA: (whispering) Do you not want to talk in front of Kima?

MARISHA: (whispering) I don't want to talk in front of Kima. (speaking) Kima? Earmuffs, Kima.

LAURA: No, that's awkward.

TRAVIS: You want me to distract her?

LIAM: It's the longest pee ever.

TRAVIS: I'll distract her! I'll distract Kima.

LAURA: Grog goes and distracts Kima.

SAM: I might be better at that. Kima, can you take a walk with me? I would like to persuade you to take a walk with me.

MATT: Go ahead and roll persuasion.

SAM: 24.

MATT: Okay. Kima gives you a concerned look and goes–

SAM: There's this thing on my body. I thought maybe you could take a look at it and you could tell me if it's good or bad? I don't know.

MATT: “Oh dear. No, please.”

TRAVIS: Scanlan, do not drop the mack.

MATT: And the two of you begin to walk away for a moment, away from the party. Briefly, while the rest of you are left behind.

MARISHA: Scanlan, do you have an earring?

SAM: I have an earring.

MARISHA: Okay, so Scanlan can hear.

SAM: I use my Minor Illusion to create a purple third nipple on me that I show her and ask her if it's okay, or if it's–

MATT: Okay, things are getting a little weird.

SAM: Is this normal?

MATT: “None of this is normal. At all.”

SAM: It's just, I trust you. I feel like I know you. You know we had that thing back there and then Keyleth was yelling at you. What was that all about?

MATT: “We're all under duress.”

SAM: Let's girl talk.

MATT: “We're under a lot of duress. The more and more things– people have emotions and I understand that. It's all right.” And she pulls the leather gloves off that are part of the full leather armor set and begins to inspect you. In the meantime, you guys can continue your discussion.

MARISHA: I think we should get out of here.

LAURA: What? Why?

MARISHA: Well, we've got Grog. We've got Kima. We came here to find Kima. That was our mission. I don't trust her.

LAURA: We found her, but we can't leave without her.

LIAM: So I'm walking back from my pee and I've overheard this. “We were sent here to bring back Kima.”

LAURA: And now you want to abandon her?

LIAM: She's not going to come with us until we've killed this K'Varn.

LAURA: Keyleth, what's your problem with Kima?

MARISHA: Well, look. She's been… She just gave me the wrong vibe, up front.

LAURA: Okay, vibe. What did she do?

MARISHA: She's been very rude–

LAURA: She's been very tortured. Tortured, Keyleth.

MARISHA: Right. But look what happened. She's brought countless people down here, only to meet their end.

ORION: Well, none of those people are us.

MARISHA: Right.

LAURA: They're dead because they got captured. We're stronger.

LIAM: Do you know something we don't, Keyleth?

MARISHA: Look, all I know is that only a fool believes that his path is the most virtuous. See? And he's got an intelligence of six.

LIAM: I want to use my– I would like to do a check on Keyleth.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: I want to see her intentions.

TRAVIS: (squealing) Ooh, inside-the-group check! I love it!

LIAM: It's a 14.

MATT: A 14. All right.

LAURA: (laughing) Sneaky, sneaky Keyleth.

TRAVIS: The whisper! The first whisper!

SAM: Get on camera. Get on camera. Over here, over here.

TRAVIS: Whisper on camera. He used to do this all the time. When shit goes down and all of us can't know, he whispers. And he sticks his tongue in your ear a little bit.

ORION: It's really nice.

LAURA: I can't cheat, but I really want to listen.

TRAVIS: What was that shit about now I'm manly?

LAURA: You are manly. I meant more manly.

SAM: Hey everyone, buy a t-shirt! Subscribe to Geek & Sundry. Support Felicia Day.

MATT: As you finish your statement as well, Keyleth, Clarota steps up and says, “I wholeheartedly agree. She is unstable and cannot be trusted in her state.”

LIAM: Hold on a second, that's unfair.

MARISHA: Why?

LIAM: It has been a long road. Keyleth, I know you have had a hard time. We all have. I know we're miles below the surface of the world. But we're together. We are family. And everyone here is here for you as you have been for us. Now, I say we camp for the night inside this schmuck's tent. We stay here, we rest up, sleep on it, and see how we're all feeling in the morning. We're here for you, Keyleth, and we'll protect you as you have protected us. You've got a family with us.

MARISHA: (crying) How do we know we are doing the right thing? We've killed a lot of people, you guys. We've killed a lot of people.

LIAM: Who in this world is without fault? Who hasn't made mistakes? We certainly all have.

LAURA: Keyleth, we're keeping him, K'Varn, from killing even more.

MARISHA: How do we know we're not just interfering with issues that aren't our own? We didn't know any of this until we came down here, and look she wants to take the horn. She wants the horn, and she wants to take it back herself.

LIAM: The bottom line is, all of this insanity is going to bubble up to the surface if someone doesn't stop it.

LAURA: All those creatures that have been coming up, Keyleth?

LIAM: Remember, think back. It has already begun, and no one is here to stop it except for Vox Machina. Us.

TALIESIN: We promise, we will heed your warning, but we can't run. We will heed it, though.

LIAM: We've got your back.

MATT: “We made a deal.”

TALIESIN: And we made a deal.

LAURA: We did make a deal.

MARISHA: I understand you, Clarota, and I'm on your side. I swear. But a lot of people– there have been a lot of murderers who said they did the things that they did because their gods told them to do it. Right?

TALIESIN: We'll be cautious, and we'll have you to protect us.

ORION: I dissipate invisible, and I approach Keyleth. “Your Highness. By the honor of all Stormwinds, I will let nothing happen to you. I swear it. I will fight until my death, and I have ways, of course, to get us all out of here whenever I damn well please. Do not worry.”

MARISHA: I just have a bad feeling. This horn can't make it back up to the surface. You guys have to promise me that.

LAURA: We'll keep the horn from leaving.

MARISHA: She wants to take it back. Why? If it's that bad, why does she want it?

LIAM: That may be so, but the evil that is brewing beneath the surface of the world will stretch up to everything we know. And I know that you have made mistakes. I have certainly made mistakes. That is to live. There is more at stake right now, and we are the front line. We're the only ones who can stop it. Mistakes are all right.

TALIESIN: The god in darkness will blot out the light.

MARISHA: I just hope we're not the darkness.

ORION: Oh, do you need light? (fwoosh)

MARISHA: Oh, god.

ORION: Oh, is that– I'm sorry

LAURA: Thanks, Tiberius.

MATT: “I'm not sure what this is. I'm sorry.”

SAM: “There's one more thing I need you to look at, it's just…” I cast Polymorph on myself, giving myself a gigantic dick, and I slowly pull down my pants…

MATT: Kima immediately turns around and says, “Okay!” And walks back to the group.

TRAVIS: What did I say? You can't keep it in for two seconds. Not that I blame you! My god!

LIAM: I think we are all a little frayed. I think we need to rest. Let's set up camp.

TRAVIS: Yeah, let's camp.

MATT: Kima steps in at this point and says, “I agree. (sigh) We have quite a journey ahead of us.” At which point, Clarota pipes up and says, “Indeed. We're not too far from Yug'Voril. Let us rest.”

MARISHA: Kima. I… just wanted to apologize.

MATT: “What for?”

MARISHA: I came across too harshly that night.

MATT: She puts her hand up and… in a matronly way. “It's honestly not a worry. War is stressful, and all of us have been through a lot for this experience. I understand. I've been where you've been, and it's not uncommon to question everything around you, and with good reason: that's what keeps you alive. Were you to believe every person that crossed your path, you would not have made it past your 15th season. I can assure you, as best as I can, that I mean the best for all of us. I just know that if we don't do what we're here to do, far more people will suffer than the few I've brought down here to protect me and for me to protect. I'm not asking for your trust. I'm just asking for your patience.”

MARISHA: Well, I can grant you that. Only if you promise to grant us respect in return, because I feel you were a little untrusting of what we were doing up front, which I once again understand.

MATT: “You caught me at a rough time.”

MARISHA: Same here.

MATT: “Well, thank you.”

LIAM: I'm sorry, Scanlan, what is that?

SAM: Oh, this bulge down here?

MATT: “That's bedtime is what that is. All right, everyone, let's go ahead and find ourselves a rest.” All right. So as everyone goes to camp for the evening we are going to go ahead and take a break. Potty break for folks. We'll be back here in about ten or so minutes.

TRAVIS: Could you un-Polymorph your tripod, for god's sake?

ORION: Before we go to sleep, I cast a bunch of spells in stuff.

MATT: All right, guys. Awesome See you in a little bit.
Break

[character intros] [dramatic music] [dramatic music]
Part II

MATT: Welcome back, everyone. We've been sufficiently rested. First, we're going to say thank you and welcome to all our new viewers. Welcome to Critical Role and all of its chaos: A bunch of voice actors playing Dungeons & Dragons. I also want to congratulate the first winner of our TableTop promo kit this evening, Zargross won. Well done. We'll be giving out another one at 2,750. So 2,750 subscribers and someone else in the chat room will win another promo kit. So that's cool.

LIAM: We will be here every week, so subscribe.

MATT: Also, t-shirts on sale, as of today. They are a limited run for two weeks. We are trying to get to our goal of 1,000 before that's done, hopefully. So you can just scroll down to the bottom of the Twitch page; you'll find a button there that will get you to that shop. So go for it!

MARISHA: Wait! Also, the PayPal is working again, for donations.

MATT: All right, so the 826 donation's working again. Yay! Let us begin. So after an evening's rest, taking your respective turns keeping watch, all of you come to consciousness once more. Clarota anxiously sits at the edge of the camping facility, looking deeper into the tunnel ahead, keeping his eyes peeled in the darkness.

SAM: I check under my belt because the spell has worn off. And I'm back down to my normal one and a half inches. Which on a gnome is pretty big.

LAURA: Thank you.

SAM: Length! And girth.

LAURA: Oh god, what?

SAM: It's like a square. Like a cube.

MATT: Anyway, you guys eventually come to consciousness and finish cooking whatever bits of food you've managed to muster at this point in time in the Underdark.

LAURA: It's doughnuts.

MATT: Yeah, it is doughnuts. Under-doughnuts.

MARISHA: And Indian food, apparently.

TALIESIN: Under-Indian.

MATT: By the way, all of those who contributed to getting us food tonight, thank you so much.

ALL: Thank you!

MATT: Clarota seems slightly impatient as everyone is waking up and goes, “Come! Ahead, we shall find it's Yug'Voril.”

LAURA: That's your city?

MATT: “Beautiful city of secrets.”

LAURA: I thought your people had thrown you out. Why so eager to get back?

MATT: “Without the colony, I serve no purpose. I am wandering, aimless. I wish to return to the Elder Brain.”

LIAM: And to be fair, he was only thrown out once K'Varn took over the Elder Brain. Correct?

MATT: “No. They threw me out long before, for my gift.” And you see a little spark of arcane blue filter out of his fingers in the air and then (poof). Small spark. “It is an abomination to my people. I am considered anathema. But to save them! To save my city, then they shall have me back a hero.”

LAURA: And if they don't?

MATT: “They will. I can sense it.”

ORION: Well, yes, it makes perfect sense, Clarota. I would think they would grant you a hero's welcome, as well.

LAURA: If not, you have a home with us.

MATT: “Thank you. Forward, we will find shrouded in the forest of fungus our destination. Come.” It begins to drift down into the dark tunnel further below.

TALIESIN: We follow.

TRAVIS: Yeah, we follow.

ORION: I follow behind them and call out to him, “Are you using Levitation, or what? How are you– is this how you–”

MATT: “It's how we get around, dragonborn.”

ORION: Oh, okay.

MATT: His tentacles flicker at his face for a second. As you guys continue forward in silence, K'Varn seems to be more chatty than usual, almost like the proximity is– this is excitement to him, instinctually.

MARISHA: Did you mean Clarota? You said K'Varn.

MATT: I meant Clarota.

LIAM: Slip of the tongue!

TRAVIS: I was like, “oh shit.”

LAURA: See, he slipped-of-the-tongue before and he screwed us over with a sneaky-sneaky!

MATT: It's been a long week. I know. Sorry. As Clarota drifts, “Our people, we are a structured society. Together we provide for each other. Broken into creeds, we function rather pleasantly.” And he drifts forward again at full pace.

LAURA: Clarota seems pretty excited to get home. I'm worried for him.

LIAM: Worried for him?

LAURA: Yes.

LIAM: What, for his effect on the group?

LAURA: I'm worried that they won't take him back, what that will do to his state.

LIAM: Well, the bottom line is, (sighs) we have a pretty clear goal at hand. Everything else will have to be figured out afterward.

ORION: I still follow Clarota. I'm like, “So is it– do you do it with your mind, or is it just like– were you all taught as a child to be able to levitate, because it seems–”

MATT: “It's inherent, much like your gifts. It's just how we get around.”

ORION: Good to know. Understood.

TALIESIN: K'Varn, the god in darkness. I want to wrack my brain to think if I've ever had any lessons or if that name has ever come up in any of my reading.

MATT: All right. It'd be a history check. Like a super-super history check.

TALIESIN: History check?

LIAM: A super history check.

TALIESIN: No whammies. That's a 13.

MATT: 13? The name is as fresh to you as it was the day you heard it.

TALIESIN: Oh, fiddlesticks.

TRAVIS: I walk over to Lady Kima and I say, “How's that greatsword been treating you?”

MATT: She walks and she's using it almost like a stick in the dirt as she takes a step. “You know, it's served its purpose so far, I just (sighs) I wish… I wish that vault wasn't lost. Leather isn't my idea of defensive.”

LAURA: Would you fancy a trade, Kima? I have elven chainmail, if that would help you.

MATT: “Perhaps?”

LAURA: I could take that leather armor off your hands?

SAM: But you'll be vulnerable, won't you?

LAURA: No, actually. The chainmail isn't right for me.

MATT: “Certainly.” (laughs) She looks to you, specifically. (laughs)

LAURA: (laughs) Stick figure… (laughs)

ORION: Stick figure!

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Got it! Got it. We're good.

MATT: “Perhaps we'll find a more modest place to swap, but yes, I agree.”

LAURA: Dang it, I should've done that before we–

SAM: I can make you a modest spot to change?

LIAM: Grog, are you skinning a boar over there? What are you doing?

TRAVIS: Yeah, that's what they call it in some countries.

(all laugh)

MATT: Some of you summon the stapler straw.

MARISHA: Summon the staples!

MATT: (laughs) All right, so. As you continue to press forward deeper into this tunnel network, the air begins to grow steadily colder and colder. The temperature, it's– you begin to see your breath a little bit in the air.

ORION: Am I mistaken? You're really damaged still?

LIAM: We slept!

MATT: Yeah, you guys all slept overnight.

TRAVIS: I'm up to full, yeah.

ORION: So, the scars are…?

LAURA: The scars are cool!

MATT: I mean, the visual scars are still there but he's at full hit points. They're healing slowly.

TRAVIS: Yeah, don't you fix these.

ORION: As I notice, I go, “Anybody with (mumbling) knowledge of medicine should give a whack at cleaning some of those.”

SAM: Oh, you know what, though? Before we go any further, I remind Pike that Vax's foot damage needs daily repair, doesn't it?

MATT: “Oh! Yes, of course!” She comes over and you guys take a slight break as Pike comes and sets you down.

LIAM: It's not pretty to look at.

LAURA: She's seen it already, brother.

MATT: “Oh, I've seen worse.”

TRAVIS: Wait, what happened to your foot?

LAURA: It got melted off. Aw, come on, not again!

TRAVIS: Oh my god! (laughs) That looks awful. Really awful.

LIAM: It's fine, except the pinkie toe.

LAURA: He's got a little pinkie nubbin!

LIAM: Pinky toe's a nubbin now, yeah

TRAVIS: You know, we could just take care of the whole thing right now, if you want.

ORION: No, Grog, that defeats the purpose.

TRAVIS: No? Rash? …all right.

LIAM: I need Percy to make me a replacement first.

TALIESIN: Make a little metal toe?

LIAM: Pike, could you hook a brother up?

MATT: “Certainly.” She sets the foot down, she begins to gather up her runes, and she's casting a 4th-level spell.

LAURA: She should've done it before we went to sleep.

MATT: Aye, but alas, she's not here. Sorry, Ashley. So that would be the equivalent of about 32 hit points. She's also going to attempt a medicine roll, as well. Okay. You notice there is some progress that is slow, but some of the burn scarring from the dip in the magma is beginning to slowly subside. Fresh skin is beginning to show, but it's still pretty rough.

LAURA: It still smells amazing, so if you could just–

TRAVIS: It does smell amazing, actually.

SAM: It's like a weasel on your leg.

LAURA: Clarota, are we planning on going to your village before we go see K'Varn, or are we going after K'Varn first? I'm confused.

MATT: “K'Varn resides within the city, the temple.”

LAURA: Oh, is he a mind flayer, then? I mean, is he like you?

MATT: “I have not seen him myself, since I was cast out before he took the star, took my people under his spell.”

TALIESIN: Just to be clear, the temple of what?

MATT: He leans forward for a second. “The temple. We don't know its original purpose. The city we acquired, we found, we took root. Yug'Voril existed long before our colony did.”

TALIESIN: Okay. That's good to know. That's very good to know. Thank you.

MATT: “Very well…” He continues floating forward. The air, still chilly, with steadily more and more moisture. The rock walls become less and less jagged, growing smoother from endless years of condensation, mineral drip, and slow erosion. Begin to give that smooth inner cave look to the outsides of this tunnel.

LIAM: As we walk, Vax falls in next to Keyleth. “Keyleth?”

MARISHA: Yes? What?

LIAM: We're walking. Are you all right?

MARISHA: I'm doing okay.

LIAM: You are?

MARISHA: Yeah. Why?

LIAM: Everything we said last night was true. We're here for you.

MARISHA: I'm here for you, too.

TALIESIN: We're having a discussion of how best to go about this.

LAURA: While that happens, can I use my Primeval Awareness to sense if I sense any dragons in the city coming up in front of us?

MATT: Certainly. As you're walking, the group slows with you, as you have to really maintain concentration on this. You close your eyes and you consider. You sense no sources of dragon within the radial of your ability to sense in this cavern structure.

TRAVIS: Are our feet leaving footprints?

MATT: Subtle ones, but yeah.

TRAVIS: Son of a bitch! Dust of Tracelessness everywhere!

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Good!

TALIESIN: Missed our little flower girl.

MARISHA: I know! So glad we have him back.

TALIESIN: I want to just put something out on the headsets really quickly. “When we get into the city, I need everyone to promise that we're not going to enter the temple. No one rush in, no one be brash. No one make a poor decision. We're going to wait. No matter what happens, don't enter the temple until we've all had a moment to figure out what's happening.”

LIAM: No one be a yahoo.

ORION: Agreed.

MARISHA: I think it's a trap.

TALIESIN: If there's going to be a trap, it's going to be getting us into the temple.

MARISHA: He wants us. He wants us there.

TALIESIN: He literally invited us into the temple.

LAURA: So don't go to the temple.

TALIESIN: We walk to the temple, we don't enter the temple.

LAURA: So enter the temple. Understood.

TALIESIN: Understood. Excellent.

MATT: At this point, beginning to notice the tunnel itself, the cavern, is swaying back and forth a little bit with this. As opposed to a straight path, the tunnel is beginning to arc left and right. There's little pockets and crevices beginning to show at certain points, and you start seeing small bits of bluish crystal jutting in small pockets out of cracks in the rock.

MARISHA: Did you say that there was mushrooms? A mushroom forest, a fungus?

MATT: Clarota yesterday mentioned a fungal forest.

MARISHA: But we haven't seen it yet. But we're starting to go into the crystal caverns.

MATT: Starting to find bluish crystals, which Pike makes a motion. “Yes, I saw this in my vision, too!”

LAURA: Can I touch some of the crystals? Are they removable?

MATT: You reach out and touch the crystal. As you do, go ahead and– no.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Dick move!

TRAVIS: I love it.

LAURA: The greed! The greed gets me.

MATT: (laughs) You reach out and touch the crystal, and it's cold to the touch, as is most of the stone wall, and you can see there's condensation on it that gets on your fingers a bit. It's smooth, except for the jagged points where the natural formation juts out. You tug on the crystal a little bit, find if there's any place there that's moveable, and it's pretty solid in that rock wall.

MARISHA: Does it appear to be producing cold?

MATT: No, the temperature doesn't seem different at all to the air. There doesn't seem to be a source at all; it's the same temperature as the rest of the tunnel.

MARISHA: Can I do a nature check to figure out what kind of crystal this may be?

MATT: Yeah, sure.

LAURA: Tiberius, these look like the crystals on your staff.

ORION: “Hm? Oh, ooh, yes! They're pretty.” I take out one of my daggers– yes, I do have daggers– and (clicking noise) I'm going to chip away a couple of chunks.

TALIESIN: Actually, let's grab a few chunks. I may have an idea for later.

MARISHA: 13 for my nature check? Not that great, it's all right.

TALIESIN: Throw a few into the Bag of Holding.

MATT: All right. I will say, go ahead and make an Arcana check as well?

ORION: Oh, yeah, okay. (mumbling) 14.

MATT: 14? Okay. It's hard-pressed to find out where these crystals came from, what their source is, or if they naturally are here or if they're put there through some other means, but the crystals do have a very, very faint magical residual energy to them. Useless, almost. It's the equivalent of finding crumbs at the bottom of a cereal box. It's there. You can see at one point there was something magical about their presence or their creation, but it is long faded.

ORION: Cool. Sweet.

TRAVIS: Do you still want more of them?

TALIESIN: I'll take a few.

TRAVIS: I go Hong Kong Phooey on the wall of crystals with my axe and I just (snarling).

TALIESIN: Thank you!

MATT: When the noise dies down, you gather shards and pieces. Probably enough to fill a small bucket. You can indeed fill your small bucket, should you have one. That is your prerogative, Grog.

TRAVIS: I don't, but I have a fancy robe. And I put it in there and I bundle it up.

MATT: Okay! If you had a stick, you could be a crystal hobo.

TALIESIN: A fancy bundle of crystals.

MARISHA: We also have a fancy Bag of Holding.

LAURA: It's in the bag. It's all in the bag.

MATT: About a half an hour further down this tunnel, both Vax and Vex simultaneously notice a part of the wall to the left that is actually visibly cracked and what appears to be almost a narrow passage that juts off to the left. However, there is a large boulder, solid stone, that is wedged into this. Apparently blocking the passage.

LIAM: Grog, we need you over here.

TRAVIS: What?

LAURA: Could you possibly move this very large, very heavy boulder for us?

LIAM: Scanlan, you as well.

SAM: Of course.

TRAVIS: I need your help.

LAURA: Pike!

TRAVIS: I would like to move the boulder.

MATT: All right.

LAURA: Can I perception around it before we do anything?

MATT: Certainly! Go ahead and roll perception.

TRAVIS: It's in the path?

LAURA: It's a side path that's been blocked.

LIAM: 15 for Vax.

LAURA: Oh, did you see it?! It was there and it went like that! It was a 20 and then it went (squeaky noise) because it was on the side. But that's okay. 20 is what it ended up as.

MATT: 20? Okay. Both of you guys take a look. There's nothing immediately dangerous at all. It just looks like this rock was not naturally formed here, of course. It looks like it was wedged in. Like it was actually placed there intentionally.

TRAVIS: 26? On the strength check?

MATT: On the strength check? So as you guys are explaining, “This seems to be a fairly–” You don't even get to finish your sentence before Grog goes– grabs the boulder, gets underneath and, lifting with the knees, Atlas-style. Puts the weight on the back and (groans)–

SAM: I'm singing to help him, to inspire him. “(singing) Push it, push it real good! Push it, push it real good!”

TRAVIS: (singing) Push it, push it real good.

MATT: With a resounding (scraping sound) scraping sound and a large crack, some of the rocks that it's wedged in break off and tumble to the sides, and you get the boulder free and you're now clutching it on top of you. And it's very, very heavy.

ORION: Oh! I use my Mage Hand and I push it, too.

MATT: You lose your balance over the boulder as it's now shoved off of its axis.

LAURA: Oh no!

MATT: It falls behind you, slamming into the wall, blocking half the passage, the passage you guys were going down immediately. You can still pass it, you just have to walk around it. And you may have tweaked something in your back a little in the process.

LAURA: Oh, Grog, how's your back?

TRAVIS: I roll over on my stomach and I ask Trinket to step on my back.

LAURA: Oh, Trinket, give him a massage. He's really good at it!

TRAVIS: I roll over and have Trinket step on my back.

MATT: Trinket gets up, pushes on you with the bear claws.

MARISHA: Make biscuits, Trinket. Make biscuits on Grog's back.

TRAVIS: (groans in relief)

MATT: You can hear the cracks.

LAURA: Can I look down the passageway that was opened up?

TRAVIS: Thank god.

MATT: You can. The passage is very, very thin. It can maybe fit you individually. It can barely fit Grog when you actually go through the passage proper.

SAM: It's pretty spacious in here, I think.

(all laugh)

MATT: For a gnome, yes. But yeah, it's pitch black going forward. Which means you guys can see. It's equivalent of low light for you in pitch darkness. About 30 feet ahead of you, you can see the path continues for a little bit and then widens up into what looks like a small chamber. But you'd have to get closer.

LAURA: Is it dangerous at all?

MATT: Make a perception check.

ORION: Everywhere is dangerous.

SAM: How far is the chamber?

MATT: About 30, 35 feet back. So?

LIAM: 21.

LAURA: 18.

MATT: Best you can tell, it just looks like a chamber and it looks like a hallway.

TALIESIN: We should investigate.

MARISHA: It just looks like a death trap.

TRAVIS: If this is a tomb, I'm going to be so pissed at the two of you.

LAURA: Tiberius, can you send a little light down that passageway?

ORION: Yeah, sure. You want to shoot an arrow for me, love?

LAURA: Let's do it.

LIAM: Vax chases the arrow.

SAM: You're just going to go down the hall?

LIAM: Yeah, stealth.

MATT: All right, so, as the light– the arrow shaft vibrantly bursts into bright, Tiberius-created light. It arcs slightly down the hallway. Only a 35-foot distance. It goes pretty quickly and then (sound of arrow embedding itself) into what looks like a piece of rock, actually wedging itself into a piece of rock before falling to the ground, chipping a chunk upon impact. As it hits, you can see it's a small, roundish, oval chamber. You can see what looks like small piles on the ground at the far end. Still hard to make out from this distance, but you are welcome to enter.

LIAM: I followed it.

MATT: You followed it in?

LIAM: Yeah, I rolled a 26 on stealth.

MATT: Right. You rush in.

LIAM: Follow up the arrow.

SAM: Bear trap!

(all laugh)

MATT: First thing you understand: the air smells faintly of ancient untouched dust and mildew.

LAURA: Oh no, what did we just let loose?

MATT: You glance at the floor and notice what appear to be six long-dead bodies strewn across the ground.

MARISHA: How long-dead?

MATT: Skeletal and covered in webs.

SAM: Who's in there? Just Vax right now?

MATT: Just now Vax.

LIAM: I'm going to check out the very first, the closest body to the exit.

MATT: Okay, go ahead and make an investigation check.

TRAVIS: Nah, it's fine. They're dead.

LIAM: 19.

MATT: 19, okay. As you look across the body, I mean there's nothing formal about this area, there's no fine, chiseled structure. It looks like a natural formation. It just appears to have been the final destination for whoever these individuals were. And you do notice, the way they're adorned, they were an adventuring party. They were people who came down here long ago for whatever reason and the last destination was this small cavernous space.

LIAM: You said they're covered in webs?

MATT: There are webs on them, but the webs themselves are small, natural spider.

LIAM: Small, natural. So not Bilbo Baggins.

MATT: But you do notice that each one of their skulls has a giant hole bored into the bone itself. Different places in the skull.

LIAM: I'm just going to start searching all of them.

MATT: Anyone else want to do anything?

TALIESIN: I'm going to make my way, as well.

ORION: I thought we were all following.

MATT: The rest of you make your way in one by one. It's a small room.

LAURA: I'm staying outside with Trinket and Grog.

MATT: Okay, you guys hang out there.

SAM: I feel like Pike wouldn't want us to do too much damage to these bodies. I just feel like she wouldn't want us to disturb them.

LIAM: I don't give a shit about these bodies. I care about what they are carrying.

MATT: Okay, looking at it, you notice that they have been here for at least 200 years. Two of the bodies are male humans. There are two dwarven bodies: one male, one's female.

LAURA: Armor. Look for armor!

MATT: One female gnome and one half-orc.

MARISHA: Wait, wait. What?

(all laugh)

ORION: Half-orc.

MARISHA: Half-orc? Okay. Hang on. You listed all that off.

SAM: I'm going to inspect the gnome.

LIAM: You're not even in the room.

MATT: Okay, so you enter the room. Roll an investigation check.

SAM: 19.

MATT: Okay. Looking at her, you find that most of these bodies have already been for the most part turned over and looted. Some of them have no armor. They're either in plain clothes or it looks like their bodies have been tossed and taken whatever was on them, off. You do find, buried in the dirt under the gnomish female what looks to be a pristine ruby. Worth probably quite a bit.

ORION: I'm going to do an arcana check of 22. Just on the pile of bodies.

MATT: Okay, I'll get to you in just a second. You, as you're inspecting the bodies on the other side, you come across the dwarven male is still fully armored.

LAURA: Ooh!

ORION: Nice.

MATT: Actually has a golden chainmail on and is clutching what looks like a metal maul. The rest of them have no armor and no weapons. But this one is still fully adorned. And you also notice that the female dwarven corpse, while devoid of any accoutrements, any coin purses, belts or anything, does have, hidden within the bony clavicle, what little bit of stretched dried skin is pulled against it, a pendant that is gleaming blue.

LIAM: I grab the pendant, and then I start– this looks good for Pike, so I start taking the chainmail off.

MATT: You pull the pendant and you look at it. It has a very beautiful sapphire emblem and you rub the dust off of it and you look at it. And you recognize this emblem. This is the emblem that adorns House Thunderbrand of Kraghammer. You turn it over and on the back, there's an engraving on the back that says: “For Lorna, my love.”

LAURA: Oh! Didn't he say to bring back some stuff from the Underdark?

ORION: Yes. This is what we need.

SAM: Who's he?

TRAVIS: That name sounds familiar, though.

LAURA: Oh wait, your magic guy said to bring back some magic stuff from the Underdark.

SAM: From the Value of Valor. Tremaine? Was that his name?

ORION: And that's what this is. Let me take it and do– I'll use that arcana check on that.

MATT: Yeah, the actual amulet itself does have a magical essence to it.

ORION: I think this will do for our friend back up on the surface. Or under surface.

SAM: Oh, it's something.

LAURA: What is it?

SAM: Amulet of the Shield.

ORION: (mumbling) This protective amulet of the shield … adding plus five to your AC against that attack.

LAURA: What does it do?

SAM: It protects you.

MATT: It effectively acts as a Shield spell once per day. Once per short rest.

SAM: Once per day?

MATT: Once per rest.

ORION: Nice. It's like a magic shield.

MATT: Yeah, it's a reaction.

TRAVIS: Do you have to be able to use magic to use it?

MATT: No.

TRAVIS: Oh!

LAURA: I don't think so. Who has low AC that could use it?

ORION: Well, I'm the only glass cannon.

MATT: So you're going over to the armor. You're getting the armor for Pike? All right, as you reach out and grab the golden chain mail on it, the cold air around the chainmail is noticeably piercingly cold to the touch. Make a constitution save.

LAURA: Oh that's why it's still– Oh no!

TRAVIS: What was it?

LAURA: One.

TRAVIS: One!

MATT: Natural one.

TRAVIS: We have a natural one

MATT: All right. As you guys are all doing this, you hear the sudden (groans) this clenching of breath, and you glance over real fast and find Vax has fallen onto his back, and his fingers are curled back, and you can see this dark energy that seeps into his body for a second. You can see his veins pulsing a little bit. You feel your form– there's no physical damage taken to you whatsoever, but you sense this sapping of your strength, and your breath is shallow. You imagine this is what an elderly person would feel like. You have this lack of energy. As you're saying this, Pike comes over to you, Kima runs over to you and they both take a look at you. Pike starts inspecting you, using her medicine. And Kima, they both look at each other, pass a few notes back and forth, and they both agree. “Well, it appears this dwarven individual, when he came to his end, was not very happy and in doing so left a very strong curse behind on his body.” Look about to each other.

LAURA: Everything okay in there?

LIAM: (wheezing) No.

SAM: Is he dead?

MATT: No. You are considered cursed, which means you have disadvantage on all your ability checks and attacks.

LAURA: You're cursed?

MARISHA: How do we get rid of this?

MATT: There are spells like Remove Curse.

LAURA: I bet Pike has that spell.

TRAVIS: Remove Curse?

LAURA: I don't know?

MATT: Pike's not here. I don't have her spell list.

TRAVIS: I could try it, hold on. Nope.

LAURA: Nothing?

MARISHA: What did you touch? What did you grab?

LIAM: Armor. It was the armor, wasn't it?

LAURA: It was that golden armor, yeah.

TRAVIS: Let's leave the golden armor alone.

LIAM: (strained) I got this for you, Pike.

MATT: Wait a second. Ha!

LAURA: Oh no.

MATT: All right.

TRAVIS: Oh no. Don't make him laugh.

MATT: So. At which point, Kima steps forward and pushes everyone away for a second and concentrates. And she reaches up and grabs the holy symbol of Bahamut from underneath the front of the leather armor, because she still hasn't exchanged it with you. And it glows with this vibrant silver light and the light travels down her arm, to her hands, to her fingers, and she places it out and reaches towards the armor and as she touches it, she winces slightly, but you see this glowing dark furious anger, this face arise out of the armor, giving off this slight whispering howl sound (whispering howl) and then (poof) dissipate. As you see the divine energy begin to dissipate and glide off her hand, she reaches over and touches you with her hand, and the curse is lifted.

SAM: Oh, that was easy.

MATT: I looked over and realized that oh, she actually has that spell.

LIAM: So I grasp Kima by the hand and say, “That is one I owe you. That's one I owe you.”

MATT: She gives you a wink and says, “To be honest, I just really wanted the armor.” And she pats you on the shoulder.

LIAM: It's yours.

MATT: She takes the golden chain off of the body, she (chuckles) she tells– no, you're out of the room.

TRAVIS: Do you need me to create a curtain for you to change behind?

LAURA: You're not in the room.

MATT: She finds a cranny in the room. She puts on the chain mail, replacing the leather armor she gives back.

LAURA: (whispers) Damn it. I was trying to get it.

MATT: She does give you the greatsword and then takes the maul from the corpse of this dwarf. But as she takes it from the body, she sits down and says a silent prayer. Clutches her symbol and as she does, she takes from one of her pouches a small bit of blessed water and tosses it across the body of the dwarf. Puts it back away and stands up. “All right. Shall we continue?”

TALIESIN: Right.

LIAM: As we leave the cavern, I give one of these to the dwarven bodies.

MATT: You swear you hear a slight shift in bone.

LAURA: Ooh!

MATT: In silence left behind in darkness.

SAM: I'm going to take the ruby, too.

LAURA: Hey, did you get that armor back?

LIAM: Yeah, I got that armor back.

LAURA: Hey, can I have that armor? Can I have it?

LIAM: Sorry, sis.

LAURA: Please?

LIAM: Kima has it.

LAURA: No, she gave it back.

LIAM: No, she wore it.

LAURA: No, she gave it back.

MATT: She put the chain mail on, she gave you the leather armor back.

LAURA: Give it, give it.

LIAM: Oh, that's between you and her. I'm not taking armor off of her.

LAURA: Please, can I have that armor?

MATT: She's holding it in her hands. “Certainly.”

LAURA: “Thanks.” I go put it on. I don't know what it is. It's magic though.

MATT: It's whatever armor you gave her.

LIAM: Wait, my armor?

LAURA: Yeah.

LIAM: That's my armor.

MATT: The armor that you gave for her to put on in the Emberhold when she had nothing on.

LIAM: I gave it to him, he gave it to her. And you're taking it? Hey, hey, hold on a second!

LAURA: Too late. Let's just keep moving, all right? Let's just keep moving.

LIAM: I think we need to roll a brother sister contest die.

LAURA: No, we should just–

LIAM: I grab her by the ear and say, “That's mine. That's mine.”

LAURA: Ow ow! Come on. I need it.

LIAM: Squeezing her earlobe really hard.

LAURA: Roll.

TRAVIS: Yeah, you two roll. Go for it.

LAURA: Shit. (yelling) Aha! It's mine, it's mine!

TRAVIS: (laughing) Sibling justice.

MATT: Persuasion versus persuasion? Is this what this was?

LIAM: Yeah, sure, sure.

LAURA: Sure it was.

TALIESIN: They played arm punch until one caved.

TRAVIS: (laughing) It's mine, it's mine.

LIAM: It's not fair.

LAURA: Yeah, what does it do?

LIAM: I'm not fucking– Figure it out.

LAURA: All right, I'll just add a bunch of stuff to my stuff.

MATT: You keep talking over each other.

MARISHA: Are you just having party arguments right now?

MATT: Apparently. As you guys head back into the cavern, you move around the boulder that Grog had moved from the side crevice. And as you continue for about another 20 or 30 minutes, some of you begin to pick up what sounds like the distant lapping of waves against a shore.

MARISHA: What.

TALIESIN: That's never good.

MATT: (wave noises) As the tunnel begins to curve larger and larger, eventually you come around a bend and the tunnel opens up into a humongous cavern housing an underground lake circling a large island. From what you can see on the edges of the walls that are closest to you as the island disappears into darkness about a hundred feet ahead of you, there are these blue crystals that you've seen throughout this tunnel completely covering the walls of this entire cavern. There is only maybe bits of and places around the wall, about five, ten feet across where there will be no crystal. Otherwise it's just grey stone and blue crystal jutting from the sides.

MARISHA: I go over to one of the crystal walls and I put my hand on the crystal and I cast Daylight, trying to see if I can emanate it up through the dome.

MATT: Okay. You cast Daylight and on the actual crystal source that you cast it on, daylight emanates from it and gives a bright beacon of light.

MARISHA: I want it to light up the crystal. Trying to see how far I can get it to reach up to the top.

MATT: Right. You notice that from the whatever crystal vein structure some of these are connected by, some of them tend to glow in spots, but you see it's localized. All this crystal isn't interconnected, is what this tells you.

MARISHA: Okay.

MATT: There are pockets here and there that are interconnected, but there are multiple veins of it going through the entire.

TALIESIN: What kind of liquid is this lake made of?

MATT: So, as you approach, the hard stone surface you guys have been walking on in the tunnel begins to give way to like a coarse sand, almost like a gravelly shore. And it appears to be fresh water. It's clear. The smell is a little musty, but not too bad. And you approach, and you can see there's just these very gentle, very soft waves that occasionally lap up on the shore, but only a few inches. There's not a whole lot of motion to the water within this cavern.

TALIESIN: Can we see to the bottom? Is it that clear?

MATT: Yeah.

TALIESIN: I've got an idea. I'm going to find a small rock– Oh, go ahead.

MATT: I'll finish my description. (chuckles) So there's this lake circling this large island across the way. You also see on this side of the shore, central, there is a large stone bridge that arches over the lake and makes landfall about roughly 200 feet on the other side, at the very, very tip closest to you of this island. It's about 15 feet wide this bridge, maybe 20 feet, and is an immediate walkway onto this island across. You can see just faintly on the edge of this island a glowing bioluminescent fungal forest that covers a large portion of this island's top side. The edges of it, you can see, rise up into cliffs that have eroded over time and are rather stark in places.

MARISHA: Plants! Look, living things!

TALIESIN: Clarota? Is this in any way dangerous?

MATT: Clarota, as you look over, is gliding into the cavern. It's the closest thing you can imagine seeing a mind flayer to smiling. He's looking about and in response to you, a few moments later, he says, “We're near home.”

TALIESIN: Let's all remember his feet don't actually touch the ground.

TRAVIS: Right. Do you know if there's anything in the water?

MATT: He glances over to you. “There are many things in the water. Fish. Crustaceans.” He points over, and you can see there is this small, very pale, colorless, whitish-gray crab that's over to the side, that looks weird, malformed. One claw is twisted on itself and dragging behind it. And it skitters off into the water. Everyone make a perception check.

TALIESIN: Yay.

SAM: No!

LAURA: Oh, natural 20!

MATT: Oh snap.

ORION: 14.

MARISHA: 20.

TALIESIN: Eight.

TRAVIS: Six.

LIAM: One.

MATT: Oh, you two. As you all walk up to the edge of the shore line and you're inspecting the water, feeling for it. You look over and on the far left side of the shore, you can see just below the waterline what looks like… a sunken boat. Or two.

LIAM: I can't see shit.

LAURA: What? There's a sunken boat in the lake.

TRAVIS: Really, should I go get it?

LAURA: Down here? Clarota, why? Why boats?

MATT: Clarota gives you a look. “I do not know. Many things wander these tunnels beyond my kin. We are but one of its denizens.”

LAURA: Who's a good swimmer?

TRAVIS: Me! I'm actually a really good swimmer.

MARISHA: Me.

LIAM: Lady Keyleth.

TALIESIN: She's a very good swimmer.

LAURA: You guys want to take a look?

MARISHA: I run over to the edge of the water and I do a swan dive and as I swan dive, I turn into a shark in the water.

MATT: Okay.

TRAVIS: I run to the water, as well, and I fucking cannonball.

(all laugh)

MATT: So Keyleth's form jumps into the air, this thin, lithe half elven figure that then turns into this giant shark beast that (splash sound) into the water underneath. A few moments later, Grog jumps in. Big splashing sound.

ORION: I'm going to follow and I'll stay behind enough to where I can cast? Do I have to get in the water also?

MATT: You can. You still can't quite see what everyone's going for, other than what she said.

ORION: Okay, I'll get a little– I won't jump in quite yet, but I'll get to the edge.

MATT: All right. The water is freezing cold. You could swear this should've turned to ice by now. Because your veins certainly feel like they have upon impact. You immediately get over that as you transform into a natural creature that's used to cold water. Grog, it's fucking cold.

TRAVIS: One and a half inches? Me, too.

(all laugh)

ORION: That's a medical condition for a goliath.

MATT: There aren't usually this many penis jokes in a session, folks. It just happens to be one of those days. So, glancing down below, you see it too. There are approximately two and a half boats that are made of some sort of a combination of wood and metal, like a heavily rusted iron. One of them looks mildly serviceable, the other one is broken with a large hole in the bottom of it.

MARISHA: I do a lap.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: Go check it out.

MATT: You look around. There doesn't appear to be much else around, but you do catch what looks like a semblance of a half-eaten corpse, a bone that is left partially buried in the ground. You don't know how long that's been there, either. It's bleached bone at this point. Whatever fishes live in this landscape have picked it clean.

MARISHA: So there's nothing in the boats at all?

MATT: Nope.

LAURA: Good times.

MARISHA: Weird.

SAM: Awesome.

ORION: We could just keep going.

LAURA: Maybe you come back.

TRAVIS: Ask him if the bridge is booby-trapped.

MATT: Make a perception check.

MARISHA: Make a perception check, (mumbles) yep, yep.

LAURA: Are you still in the water?

TRAVIS: Yeah, I'm shivering.

MARISHA: 12. As a shark, right?

MATT: Yeah.

LIAM: Plus three for shark.

MATT: Okay. You do a couple laps. Nothing really catches your eye.

TRAVIS: (gulps) I take a big breath and swim down to where the giant shark is. Can I also perception check?

MATT: You can also attempt a perception.

TRAVIS: This is like one out of every five games that I get to. 12. Plus zero.

MATT: You found some boats, yo!

LAURA: Yay.

TRAVIS: Boats!

MATT: They are broken.

MARISHA: I go and I see that Grog's underwater and I Flipper him and go up under him and, “Hold on! Here we go.”

MATT: Giant shark comes up under you and nudges you aggressively and lifts you towards the surface.

LIAM: Dolphin hump him a little bit?

MARISHA: Well… You've heard of those– never mind. I'm just going to keep going.

MATT: You guys all watch as Grog is now riding a shark.

LAURA: Awesome. Awesome.

TRAVIS: Should we ask Clarota if the bridge is safe to travel?

LAURA: Clarota, is that mushroom forest, I mean, is that your home?

SAM: Should we go there? Should we skip it, Clarota?

MATT: “The forest certainly surrounds the city.”

MARISHA: I carry Grog over to the island on the other side.

MATT: “There are many places of entry within this cavern.” And you see Clarota concentrate for a second, and within all of your minds, you suddenly have a very clear image of this entire cavern: its layout, what strange shape it is, where the general overlook is, and as clear as day, you have an entire visual of the inside of this cavern. You guys reside down here, right by the bridge on this edge of the beach. This green represents the fungus and this, you imagine, represents the city. The temple being central there.

LAURA: We should not take the bridge.

SAM: Yeah, that's a lot of fungus to get through before the city. Are they still down there in the water?

MATT: Yes, they are.

SAM: Let's wait until they get back before we decide.

MATT: I'll put this down here in case you want people to see that.

ORION: Where are we on that map?

MATT: You guys are right here.

LIAM: Grog, can you pull up any of those boats?

TRAVIS: Pull?

LIAM: Pull them up, Grog. Pull them up.

LAURA: I like it.

MARISHA: I go over and I swim Grog over. And can I, as a shark, give some shark push from the bottom?

MATT: Sure.

TRAVIS: Oh, fuck, yes, we have an underwater breathing kit, that we bought at the store. There's two of them.

MARISHA: Sick!

MATT: Potion?

SAM: I don't know, we bought one (laughs).

TRAVIS: I wrote, “two underwater breathing,” and didn't write what it was.

MATT: Two underwater breathing biscuits. Two underwater breathing waffles.

TALIESIN: It was totally potions.

MARISHA: Potions.

MATT: I'm pretty sure it was potions. I'm pretty sure they were potions.

ORION: What type of boat is this?

MATT: You haven't had a good look at it yet.

MARISHA: I tried to look, but I'm a shark, so I don't know shit, really. It's a boat.

TRAVIS: Okay, so we swim up to the top and we come back to the shore and you're just in the water still. “Yes?”

SAM: What's down there? Do you need help?

TRAVIS: It looks like some kind of boat.

SAM: That's all you got?

TRAVIS: My perception is shit.

SAM: Well, should we try again with someone who has better perception?

LAURA: You want me to go down there?

TRAVIS: Absolutely.

LAURA: All right. Let's do it.

LIAM: Ladies and gentlemen, we're going to pull up one of those boats.

LAURA: Maybe we should check out the boats first.

MARISHA: You want to jump on my back?

LAURA: Yeah.

ORION: “Is that all we need to do? Okay, fine.” And I walk over to the thing and I jaunt off into the water.

MATT: Tiberius slowly disappears beneath the surface. It is cold!

ORION: “Oh, it's so cold.” I take out one of my bottles right before I go under. My bottle of air.

SAM: What?

LAURA: His air bottle.

MATT: You see the bubbles break on the surface and then eventually the bubbles stop. Tiberius may have drowned; you don't know.

MARISHA: I can see him.

ORION: I swim over there. I use my tail. I think I'm a good swimmer. And I want to swim up to where I can see the boat.

MATT: Okay, this doesn't take you too far. It's maybe 60 feet from the edge of the coastline.

ORION: Oh, okay. Is it darkened? Can I see the boat now?

MATT: You can see, as long as you're traveling with a Light spell going on, which I assume you do at most points.

ORION: Yes. I still have my staff.

MATT: But yeah, you see there are two and a half boats, essentially. They're large, looks like they were meant specifically for travel. You're not quite sure where it may have come from.

ORION: How large is it?

MATT: I'd say it's maybe about 15, almost 20 feet from end to end.

ORION: Okay, so I notice it. You're nudging the one that you want, right? Is that's what's going on? So I notice that.

LIAM: Pull it up.

MARISHA: I try and push it.

ORION: I (ping) my Ioun Stone, direct Telekinesis to lift up the boat out.

MATT: So you're putting your Ioun Stone on?

SAM: He gave the other one to me.

MATT: Oh, got you. Okay, so you put on the Ioun Stone.

ORION: And I cast Telekinesis on the boat to lift it up.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: And I try to swim underneath it.

MATT: Okay. There's a rustle in the waves on the surface of the water, as you see all of a sudden this (impact sound) this bowing and splashing begins to occur. The ship begins to rise out of the sediment on the bottom of the lake.

ORION: I try to get it just right on the lip.

MATT: It gets up. It's filled with water, you tip it on its side and spill the rest of the water out. There's still a large hole on the bottom of the boat, on the inside. And you carry it over back to the surface of the shore and rest it gently onto the rock.

LAURA: Can you fit that boat in your Wheel of Mending?

ORION: I'm underwater. I'm going to jaunt back up, up to the surface.

LAURA: Tiberius, welcome to the surface. Can you use your Wheel of Mending on that boat that you just pulled up?

ORION: I put my bottle away. “I don't know. It's a good question. I mean, I don't see why not.”

SAM: Percy could assist. He's got some engineering.

TALIESIN: Well, I can't help with the wheel, but I could repair the boat, in theory.

ORION: Percy, why don't you give it a whack before we put a boat on the Mending Wheel.

TALIESIN: I'm going to make a list of things that I'm going to need. I may have to send them down for more parts of boats from the other boats.

LAURA: Try the wheel first.

MATT: Telekinesis is still in effect currently, so if you wanted to do that, now would be the time.

TALIESIN: Bring up the broken boat.

ORION: Oh, yes, here you are.

MATT: Okay, so Tiberius comes back with the half boat, essentially, that's cracked in half and part of it is ruined and broken. But there's still a sizeable amount of oxidized iron, metal, and wood here that you think would be serviceable for repairs.

TALIESIN: Please don't roll a one. Okay, so I'm going to do a little tinkering to see if I can get this fixed.

MATT: Okay.

TALIESIN: Unless you want to try the wheel first?

MATT: It's up to you guys. So you're going to go ahead and make a tinkering check?

TALIESIN: I'll do a tinkering check first and then try the wheel.

ORION: Why don't you tinker it first.

MATT: Anyone want to help?

TALIESIN: What do I use as my modifier?

MATT: I would say this is a key point in time for a Scanlan song.

SAM: Oh! Yes, of course.

MATT: You use this bardic inspiration specifically for stuff like this.

SAM: Oh, I do. Yes, I will inspire you. I don't know what to sing. What's a boat song?

MARISHA: (singing) The love boat…

SAM: How does it start?

TALIESIN: I'm not feeling very inspired.

SAM: (singing hesitantly) Something exciting's waiting for you?

(all laugh)

SAM: (singing) I'm on a boat, motherfucker! I'm on a motherfucking boat. (speaking) That's all I got.

TALIESIN: I feel inspired.

MATT: I'll give you a d6 for that.

(all laugh)

LIAM: (singing) Sailing…

SAM: (singing) Takes me away to where I've always heard it go.

TALIESIN: That's worth a d10.

MATT: If it wasn't Vax singing.

TALIESIN: Okay.

MATT: Go for it.

TALIESIN: All right. What do I add to the modifier, by the way?

MATT: You add whatever your tinkering bonus is, which should be your dex.

TALIESIN: My dex modifier, thanks. Thank god. 13.

MATT: 13 total?

TALIESIN: Yeah, 13 total.

MATT: Okay. You take a while with it. It takes a little bit longer than you anticipated, but you have your general tools with you. You hammer away. About an hour and a half to two hours later, you're sweating, your muscles are sore, but you feel like you've managed to get the hole for the most part patched. Now it's just to test its buoyancy.

SAM: You want to try the Mending Wheel?

ORION: My spell doesn't last that long.

TALIESIN: Let's put it in the water and see what happens.

TRAVIS: I start pushing the boat back in the water and I jump in and I start jumping up and down.

MATT: You push it in. You leap in the boat. It (impact sound) gives to the 600 pounds that are Grog. It splashes a bit, it lifts, it seems to be holding. It's leaving ripples in the water.

LAURA: Will it fit all of us, you think?

MARISHA: I'm going to stay a shark and follow in the water.

SAM: Let's pile in the boat.

MARISHA: Can I tow them?

TALIESIN: I was about to say, we can make a harness out of rope.

MARISHA: Yeah.

TALIESIN: We'll be less conspicuous.

MARISHA: Yeah. Not as much rowing.

TALIESIN: Shark power is far less conspicuous.

ORION: I saunter on the boat up next to Grog and go, “Excuse me.” As I open the bag of holding and take out the magic carpet (sound of carpet unfurling), and I hop on that.

LAURA: I get on the magic carpet.

ORION: I'd rather be a free agent on this one. I'm not here to fight on water.

TALIESIN: I'm setting up a gun mount on the boat, just in case.

MARISHA: Do you guys want to get out the rope and put it around me?

TALIESIN: We'll get out the rope and throw a loop for you to grab.

MARISHA: I swim through the loop.

LAURA: Trinket, get in the boat.

SAM: I just want to know which way we're sailing. Are we going left?

LIAM: Clarota put the image all in our heads.

TALIESIN: See, there's an island over on that side.

SAM: This way, or do we want to go this way?

LIAM: Vox Machina, there is an island, there are also two small caves and–

LAURA: There's three small caves.

LIAM: Where?

LAURA: Well, two small caves and then a path.

LIAM: Two and then rivers and paths out, yes.

MARISHA: Do we want to check them all out? Clear out the fog of war.

LIAM: We could go straight for the big prize.

ORION: Are we all agreeing that, have we all decided to come here or here?

LAURA: Toward the island, I think.

MARISHA: I think if we can go here to this little island, I might be able to do some think-y, spy-y scrying stuff before we storm the city.

LIAM: What do you mean, Keyleth?

TRAVIS: Loot the cave first, and then the island.

LAURA: Cave first?

MARISHA: Cave first.

TRAVIS: Right, cave first.

LAURA: And then island. Let's go there.

LIAM: When we eventually want to take the temple and kill this son of a bitch, we probably want the shortest amount of distance on land as possible, which means coming in from the north end where Tiberius is pointing.

ORION: Coming in through here, which is the least resistance.

LIAM: Yes. I agree.

ORION: Directly to the temple.

LIAM: But I think we're all a little slap happy and curious.

LAURA: That might be cliffs on the back end, though, you guys. We won't be able to scale those.

MATT: Best you can tell, from the image that was given to you, any of those sections along the edge that have the jagged lines are cliffs.

LIAM: But the north-western edge has a beach?

MATT: Correct.

LIAM: But, we're curious about the island?

SAM: Let's just set sail.

LAURA: Set sail. Towards the island!

LIAM: So, Vox Machina, are we going to head around the southern, south-eastern edge?

TALIESIN: Yes.

LAURA: We're going, we're sailing.

LIAM: Does anyone know how to steer this thing?

MARISHA: I'm towing us.

TALIESIN: We're shark-powered.

LIAM: Oh, towing.

LAURA: I'm on the carpet with you.

ORION: Yes!

LIAM: That is impressive.

MATT: All right. So, you guys continue down the right side of the path. You push off into the water, being towed by Keyleth in shark form.

TALIESIN: Aw, yeah.

LAURA: Should we put Pass Without a Trace on us?

SAM: She's a shark.

TALIESIN: We're pretty stealthy.

MARISHA: I'll hug the far wall, though. I'll hug the wall.

MATT: You hug the far edge of the water. Pushing across, you find a way around and as you begin to look up the wall, you can see once again how these crystalline structures are spread out across this entire wall, going up. You can't even see the ceiling of the cavern, it's so high up from your current perspective. It just disappears into darkness. You continue following the path until eventually you come to this choke point here, where the land mass begins to– you can see where the beach begins to crest down and touch the water. As you slowly and quietly make your way around the bend, you look over and you can see the forest. Indeed, they appear to be trees, but now that you have a better view of it, you know, maybe about 400, 500 feet off from you right now, that bioluminescent glow, this very faint glow is given off by all the plant life, all these giant fungal trees. The roots have these strange, organic, almost like they're gripping the ground. The canopies of them blossom in these strange, almost mushroom-like appendages, these fungal bursts that stick off the top and form the tree-like canopy. And you can see vines hanging from each of these. It's a very strange, alien forest. Fauna that even you're not familiar with in your travels. But it does give off this dull color, this faint light source that does tend to give a general visual view of the landscape on this island. You do see, just barely beyond this point, looking across, the tops of a few buildings in the very, very distance. The color of the stone, from what you can make out, has almost a jade mixed with a grey marble. And you can just faintly make off in the distance one large pyramid-like structure that comes to a flattened precipice on top.

LIAM: This is on the island?

MATT: On the island, to your left. And there is a very, very faint greenish glow at the very top that matches the coloration of that same glow you saw in the eyes of Queen Ulara earlier and the rest of the denizens that were in her party. As you quietly begin to push along, you come to the point where there's the beach to your right and there's the island to the left. The island, which comes to this incline and then drops off on a cliff on the far side. It has its own encapsulated fungal forest. You can see what looks like a very, very faint bit of ruins on the eachfront that has mostly crumbled and fallen. But for the most part it appears to be fairly empty, other than the fungal growth itself. To the right there is another pebble beach, same consistency as the beach you first arrived on.

LIAM: What's the scale. Are we talking Manhattan and Brooklyn? Or smaller than that?

MATT: To put to scale, your boat that you found is about that big.

LAURA: Oh, okay. So it's pretty big, then.

MATT: It's pretty big.

LAURA: Okay. Should we land on the beach and then check out that little cave?

TRAVIS: Yeah.

TALIESIN: Yes, I think that's an excellent idea.

LIAM: We're all very curious.

LAURA: All right.

SAM: I'm not curious.

LAURA: As we're flying overhead, can I get a better look at if there's anything on the beach?

MATT: Yeah, as you guys come gliding down, you look at the beach. You see the ruins, you see, even though there is no real breeze or wind in this cold air, there is like a slight swaying.

LIAM: On the beach?

MATT: To the trees that reside on this.

LAURA: What about the little island– the little cave.

MATT: On here?

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: Best you can see, looking down, it's just a plain, pebble beach, an inlet there that goes into the cavern interior of the wall.

TRAVIS: Let's get all up in that bad boy.

SAM: Go in the cave?

TRAVIS: There's treasure.

LAURA: Treasure! Pirates! Arr!

SAM: I already have a ruby. I'm fine.

MARISHA: I'll stay with the boat. As a shark.

LAURA: Do we fly in, Tiberius? And just go…

ORION: Absolutely.

LAURA: All right. Stealth and fly in. Can we do that? Is that possible? To stealth and fly at the same time?

MATT: You can certainly try to keep quiet while doing so. The cave that actually opens up in the side of the wall within this cavern is about 20 feet up and about 25 feet across. So you're flying as low as you can, but you're still only about maybe 15 feet off the ground. Ten to 15 feet. Are the rest of you going in?

LIAM: Well, we're in the boat. But Grog and I want to go. Right?

TRAVIS: Nope.

LIAM: No?

SAM: I'll come.

TRAVIS: I'm thinking it'll be a quick trip.

LIAM: Is the boat coming up to the beach?

TRAVIS: Yep.

LIAM: Yes. All right. I scoop up Scanlan and go piggyback style, like he's my son, and jump on the beach.

TALIESIN: I'll wait here.

MATT: All right. Everyone who's entering the cavern, go ahead and make a stealth check.

MARISHA: Ooh! Pretty flashy.

SAM: Natural 20.

TRAVIS: Oh, Jesus.

ORION: 13.

TALIESIN: I'm in the boat.

MATT: In the boat?

LAURA: 13.

TRAVIS: Six.

LIAM: 27.

MATT: All right.

ORION: Oh, we are on the carpet.

MATT: As you guys not-so-stealthily begin to march into the tunnel here, you follow it as it bends around a little bit and it eventually opens up into this larger space. And as you enter the room, partway through this tunnel, the scent changes dramatically. That cold, still water smell begins to give way to this terrible, sulfurous, rotting smell. Very– it's near septic. And as you enter this room, the smell is dreadful, and you can tell, using your light source over here, there appears to have been some sort of a struggle. There are bedrolls and sheets strewn about and soiled and burned and torn across the floor. There's about what looks like three or four different bedspreads that have been tossed and ruined. You can see a semblance of what was a fire pit, but all the soot and ash has been smeared across the ground to the outside of it. There appears to be a half buried chest or container off in the far corner. And you can see what looks to be four dead bodies, in a not too long state of decay. You can still see flesh and skin, but there's some bone peeking through, and they're all slumped against the ground, against the corners.

SAM: Vax, why don't you go mess with them?

LIAM: I'm going to use perception on the chest and the bodies.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: That is not that good. That is 13.

ORION: I'm going to use my earring of whisper right now. “There's some fun things in here. Grog, you're not wearing it. Someone tell Grog he might need to kill something.”

LAURA: This looks a little dangerous.

TALIESIN: All right.

TRAVIS: We're killing something?

LAURA: Be ready to run.

TRAVIS: I come running in.

LIAM: I'm back from the chest. I take out one dagger and throw it at the chest to sink it into the lid. From a ways back.

MATT: You take the dagger and (sound of dagger embedding into wood) into the wood. Doesn't seem to have any immediate effect.

LIAM: Okay, so I did a 13 perception check, I guess on the chest, so I'll go to try and open it.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Oh god.

TRAVIS: Has anybody run to the back of the cave yet?

SAM: Are we all in the cave?

LAURA: We're on the carpet.

LIAM: You're on my back, Scanlan.

MATT: Grog and Percy are still in the boat, at this point.

TALIESIN: But we're listening in.

MARISHA: Grog's running in.

TRAVIS: I come running in.

MATT: Well, you're in the process of stepping out of the boat at this point. As you begin to approach the chest, you notice one of the bodies shift. (moans) Its head rolls around and it looks at you.

LIAM: Pike?

MATT: Pike is still back in the boat with Percy. “What?” She doesn't have one of the earpieces.

LIAM: Someone call Pike?

LAURA: Percy, undead!

TALIESIN: All right, we're on our way. Pike, come on.

MATT: All right. As you guys get out of the boat and begin rushing in that direction, you notice the one body looking over at you with this weird grin. You've had a few encounters with zombies or undead creatures that unnaturally move. This one has an intelligence to it that disturbs you. You glance over at the other bodies, who are already getting to their feet.

ORION: Where are the bodies located?

MATT: We will get to that at the top of our next session.

(all groan)

LAURA: Oh no!

LIAM: Oh, nuts!

TRAVIS: No killing.

LAURA: We're pirates! (growls)

MARISHA: I'm a shark, still.

MATT: Yep.

LIAM: Come back, Ashley!

LAURA: Help us, Ashley!

TALIESIN: Grog, you could throw a shark at something.

MARISHA: Can you?

TALIESIN: You can toss a shark at a zombie.

LIAM: You could use the shark like a baseball bat.

TALIESIN: You could battering-ram a zombie with the shark and just go.

ORION: Sharks don't die as soon as they get out of the water. You can last a couple minutes out of the water if you're a fish.

TALIESIN: They have sandpaper skin.

MATT: So! (laughs) So we will pick up next week with the next episode of Critical Role, in which the party will deal with this sudden surrounding of some strange, partially-decomposed corpses.

LIAM: It's the undead!

MATT: Indeed, the overlord has come!

ZAC: Hey, guys!

(all yay, cheer)

ORION: What's up, Zac?

ZAC: Good job tonight, everybody. So, I just want to do one more shout-out to those t-shirts. Scroll down, buy some shirts. We have two weeks to sell 1,000 of them. This, to be totally honest, is to prove to the powers that be that Twitch is a viable resource for income (laughing weakly), woo!

ORION: And good entertainment, good entertainment.

ZAC: Great entertainment.

LIAM: We all know this is going to grow, so we're just getting ahead of the game.

ORION: Much like Scanlan's penis.

LAURA: Enough with the dick jokes.

MATT: About that.

ZAC: So, do you guys want to read all these messages?

MATT: Yes, I'd love to!

ZAC: So, we had quite a few donations tonight.

LIAM: Yes!

LAURA: We did?

ZAC: We did.

MARISHA: Yes and, we broke PayPal.

MATT: I can charge through these real fast.

ZAC: I might let you, yeah. Phew!

MATT: I can do that. All right, starting here with Vorath. “Another donation this week to this amazing cause. You guys are hours of entertainment every time. Also Orion, Tiberius ordering donuts is not poppycock.” (laughs) Thank you so much. All right, we have Nadoprime. “I just discovered this show a week ago I'm now a subscriber?” Aw. “And I'm pledging to give five dollars every week that I watch.” Well, thank you so much, Nadoprime! It's great. We've got Lipoolflinger. “This is awesome. High fives all around. Please keep going.” We shall! This isn't ending any time soon. Unwriteable, gave us a $70 donation. Thank you, Unwriteable. That's amazing. Panobo! “Hi from Mexico, gran juego, viva el D&D.” There we go. I've been talking all night, sorry. Thank you so much. G1BigDaddyHef. “My weekly donation for a fantastic charity. Always look forward to Critical Role stream Thursdays. T-shirt reserved. Can't wait.” You guys are awesome. Huric. “Hi, there. Not sure if anyone will get in trouble if you read this out loud, but this is what the shirt I put on redbubble made so far. I made a promise that what I make from the shirt goes to the charity. Love what y'all do.” Oh, it's Matt Abernathy! Thank you so much! Great designs, too. Keep them coming. We're hoping to do some stuff with fan designs in the near future, so we'll let you guys know. EasyShadow. “Hey guys, started watching two weeks ago, and I'm hooked! Got my paycheck, so I went ahead and subbed, bought the shirt, and am now donating. Keep it up, guys. Thanks. Oh, and #SaveGrog.“ Thank you, EasyShadow. That's awesome

MARISHA: Save Grog!

MATT: Oh, MauhiduL, who I met on the Minecraft server the other day, which was amazing! If you guys haven't been on the Geek & Sundry Minecraft server. They've actually recreated physically, sequences from our campaign, like battlegrounds, and it's like walking through–

MARISHA: It's like a walkthrough! Yeah, actually, if you want a good, creative summary thus far, you can walk through this.

MATT: I got emotional walking through it

MARISHA: I know. I got all teary-eyed!

TALIESIN: The pictures you were sending were amazing.

LAURA: Yeah. They were texting all of us the pictures.

ZAC: The sculpture of myself makes me pretty emotional, too.

(all laugh)

MATT: Yeah, that's awesome! It says, "Love the show, love you guys, love Geek & Sundry, proud to be a part of something so amazing.” Thank you, MalheadL.

LIAM: Have fun with the new Manhattan-sized island. Minecraft.

MATT: Maxine196404. “I love to read and I can't imagine my life without it, so I want to help you out.” Aw. You guys are great. Thank you, Maxine! Claybmpt. “My vote last week nearly contributed to Trinket's demise, and I feel a little donation was only proper to make amends.”

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Smart.

MATT: Good on you. Kitten112. “Never experienced D&D until now and I love it more than I ever imagined I would. Thank you for sharing your fun with us.” Oh, thank you for watching! WeeklyFactoids. “Travis, what are the dimensions on your weapons and armor? I was wondering if I could cosplay as Grog for my local con in September.”

(excited cheers)

LAURA: Grog!

TRAVIS: Yes.

MATT: Find Travis on Twitter, @WillingBlam, and ask him those questions that we haven't answered.

TRAVIS: Yeah, do that.

LIAM: Get those clippers out, though. (bzzz)

LAURA: Yeah, you're going to be Grog, you've got to be bald.

MATT: Critical Role cosplay?! That's so meta, I can't even–

TRAVIS: That would be amazing.

MATT: Ah, and we'll have such a photoshoot with you guys. All right. AlmostHuman. “Such love for Critical Role. #826LA #saveGrog #geekandsundry #RIPScanlanbeard.”

(all laugh)

MATT: New hashtag. #RIPScanlanbeard.

LIAM: I know it's off-putting, but Scanlan's beard is right over here.

(all laugh)

MATT: Malaytw. “Thanks for Critical Role. Less than three.” Aw. Thank you. Anttank01. “Critical Role's amazing. Love what you guys are all doing. It has renewed my inspiration for role-playing character development, and it's for a great cause, so I'm more than happy to help. Keep up the great work.” Aw, thank you anttank01. ElmoServant. Oh, no. “Just found out about the show last Thursday and marathoned every episode on Friday. Critical Role is the best show on Geek & Sundry by far, though TableTop's pretty great, too.” Thank you, ElmoServant!

TALIESIN: We agree.

MATT: Alwiergen. I'm sorry if I butchered that.

SAM: No, that's the right pronunciation.

LIAM: Scandinavian.

MATT: I'll take it. “Love Critical Role and ordered my shirt. Sam and Liam, when's the next All Work No Play (nudge nudge, wink wink).”

LIAM: Sam, that's on you.

SAM: It's happening soon, and we're just going to be talking about Critical Role.

(all laugh)

MATT: LastCall2113. “Love the show, and an awesome campaign. Way better than most shows on TV right now.” Aw. Thank you. All right, next page.

(laughs)

SAM: There's only 20 more pages.

MATT: Lobster024. “Thanks to the entire group for sharing your adventure with us. I hope to be as good a DM as Matt in a thousand years.” Oh, you'll (pfft)– at least 400.

(all laugh)

LIAM: Second place is good.

MATT: It's– no. Just keep working on it. Just learn your material and improv. It's so much fun.

LAURA: And then get a cyborg brain, because that's what he has.

MATT: (laughs) ElectricIdolon. “I had the honor of hitting the 2,700 sub mark tonight.” That's awesome! “So why not go all the way tonight with a donation, as well? Also, holy mess, Mercer. You're a beast.” Thank you.

LAURA: He's a beast.

MATT: TheWroth. “Family favorites: Kid, Grog. Dad, Tiberius. Mom, Vax– no, wait, Scanlan. Thank you for sharing your talents with us.” Aw, thank you.

TRAVIS: The kid is very smart.

MATT: LifeIsRosie.

ZAC: RealLifeRosie.

MATT: There we go. I read for a living. “I cannot express how watching the shenanigans of you lot of lovable miscreants brightens my worst days. I'm so happy to contribute to both the further adventures of Vox Machina and 826LA, for future lovable miscreants and their own adventures. Less than three.” Thank you. They're so sweet. CheeseBug88. “Ale! And whiskey. Smiley face.” Gayaka. “Thanks so much for sharing this wonderful adventure with us and re-inspiring my love of RPG storytelling.” Aw. Thank you. Striker67. Yeah, Striker. Police brutality, coming up. “So I just want to say thank you for everything you're doing. For gamers everywhere. Loving my first edition Critical Role t-shirt and will be getting the new one, too.” Aw. “Keep sharing your adventures with all of us. Thank you, Vox Machina.” Thank you, Striker.

MARISHA: Just wanted to say we have more. We've had new ones come in. New ones.

MATT: WeeklyFactoids. “Also, hopefully I can make Travis a great axe and Sam a sword after I finish Liam and Laura's gifts, if you would like.”

TRAVIS: Wait, what?

SAM: Say that again?

ZAC: By the way, there's something really, really cool on its way here for you. Like, really cool.

MATT: What did you do? What did you guys do? They want to make your axe and your sword now.

SAM: They want to make my Singing Dawnblade?

LAURA: Travis has been looking online. He wants his own axe.

TRAVIS: I found one.

TALIESIN: He was handling a couple at Renfaire. It was kind of scary.

TRAVIS: Handling or courting?

(all laugh)

MATT: There is a definitive difference. Ah. Murkro2, thank you so much. Kargoth912, “Thanks for satisfying my D&D addiction while my DM is on vacation. You all rock.” We aim to please. Jean2343, “Thanks for the great show. It takes me back to my old gaming group.” Aw. Thank you so much, Jean. We have 82517. “Watching you guys play D&D is amazing and has inspired me to get back into playing Warhammer 40k with my friends.” Awesome. “Thank you for that, because I'd forgotten how much fun I had doing that.”

ORION: You should check out Warmachine.

MARISHA: Agreed.

MATT: Their Iron Kingdoms RPG is really good, too. All good stuff. Norrisseria. There we go. Noraseria. “I love Critical Role. It's my favorite thing I look forward to all week. You guys are all amazing, thanks for all you do.” Aw, thank you. TheCrazyNixie. “Love the CritRole team, oh and pets Keyleth the shark.” Genevels, “Great job Critical Role tonight, thanks for bringing back the t-shirts for round two. You guys have encouraged me to start my own D&D group.” Awesome! “I now #encourageboatriding”

LIAM: We want all of you guys to go find these books, find other people in your town or online, and play.

MATT: And send pictures of your group to us. We'd love to see you guys play; it's great.

ORION: Tag us, tag Wizards of the Coast, say what's up.

MARISHA: Yes, tell Wizards of the Coast. Tell them we sent you.

ZAC: Yes, tag Wizards of the Coast, please.

MATT: If anyone from Wizards is watching, you guys are awesome. All right. Macowcut. Micoughcut, “Was supposed to work out, randomly found you tonight. First-timer and newly subbed.” Awesome! Well, welcome to the fun. Meganandgrits. I have to say it that way because I grew up in the South. “Wanted to donate more for such stellarific people, but taxes murdered me. Sorry, y'all, but I look forward to being part of your voiceover endeavors, hopefully in the future.” Awesome, much love. Keep at it, indeed. PsychoticFrogger, “Bow to the overlord, your friendly neighborhood overlord. #1.5squareinches.“ Greeneyedtrobotonist. "Are you guys aware 300 shirts are already sold today?” Wow, awesome.

MARISHA: Wait, how many?

MATT: 300. “Keep staying awesome, people.” That's great! That's such good news.

ZAC: I want 500 by tomorrow morning. That's all I'm saying.

MARISHA: I think we can do it.

SAM: The night is young.

MATT: We can do it.

ZAC: The night is young. We're going to do a rebroadcast.

LIAM: What was our goal for subscribers for the night, too?

ZAC: Lucas, what was the final number on subs?

LUCAS: 2,730.

ORION: Nice!

ZAC: We're 20 away from another TableTop giveaway, which we'll probably hit tomorrow.

LIAM: And they're staying around for our questions.

LAURA: No, we're not doing that tonight.

ZAC: It's next week. If we get 1,000 by next week, we'll do a Q&A.

LAURA: Okay, 1,000 shirts sold.

ZAC: Are you saying you want to dance, is that what you're–

LIAM: No. No.

ZAC: Just kidding.

MATT: We can do a pretty late Q&A too. We'll figure it out. Make it worth everyone's while, too.

ZAC: Thank you guys for watching tonight for our Thursday programming. We're going to run a rebroadcast.

LAURA: Matt will do a sexy dance if we sell 1,000 shirts.

ZAC: Lucas, just for Travis, do you mind playing that Overlord song to usher us out of the night? This is for you, Travis.

LUCAS: I can't find it. One second.

ZAC: Oh, he's got to find it.

MARISHA: I can't find our Overlord song.

TRAVIS: What is this?

MATT: Oh, and also, for all you guys in the Philadelphia area.

MARISHA: Oh, yes.

MATT: Me and Marisha, our fair Keyleth, are going to be at Wizard World Philly this weekend, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday.

SAM: Not just this weekend. In six hours.

MATT: Our flight leaves in like two and a half hours.

LAURA: Oh man, you've got to hurry to get to the airport.

MATT: Yeah, well it leaves at 1:15, we'll be fine.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: But yeah. But yeah, so if you guys are over in that area, you can come see us at Wizard World this weekend, we'll have panels and signings and general stuff.

TALIESIN: Or if you're at LAX at 1:15, you can meet them.

MATT: Also possible! But guys, seriously, thank you all so very very much. You're all amazing. Hope you enjoyed it. Next time we'll kick off with a pretty intense goal, looks like.

ORION: I would like to say, everybody who tweets at us and all that stuff, we love it and appreciate it. It makes me smile everyday too, so thank you guys.

LAURA: Thank you for all your support.

MARISHA: It's good. I love you guys.

MATT: Do we have the song?

(Overlord song plays.)

SAM: What is that?

LIAM: Song for Grog.

ZAC: No, it's a song for me.

MARISHA: They made this for you?

LAURA: Did you erase the Overlord drawing?

MATT: Someone made a song?

TRAVIS: This is metal.

MARISHA: They made you a song.

LIAM: We would like to rage.

MATT: Oh, look at the chatroom, overlord spam. That's so great.

TRAVIS: Amazing.

LIAM: It's like the Hulk is attacking the chat.

TRAVIS: Overlord overlord.

MATT: That's great. It's on infinite repeat.

LAURA: That's amazing.

MATT: Whoever made that, well done.

ZAC: That's Alex. He's our sound dude.

MATT: That's great.

ZAC: He did all the sound effects on your intro video.

MATT: Oh, eagle cries. Absolutely necessary, well done. Guys, thanks again, we'll see you again next week, most definitely. All the love. 

Pre-Show

MATT: Welcome, everyone, to this Thursday's episode of Critical Role, where a bunch of us nerdy-ass voice actors get together and play Dungeons & Dragons. This will be our 10th episode, I think, which is awesome. For all the classic folks that have been coming every week, good to see you again; for a bunch of newcomers out there as well, welcome and thank you. I hope you enjoy. We're going to cut to some videos here. Probably the last time that we run the character backstories at the start of the show. We usually use it as partially a stall method when some of our players haven't gotten here on time. (clears throat) i.e., Scanlan. But he's on his way, I'm sure. But also since we have a lot of new people watching, and we figured it would be cool for them to actually get an idea of the character backgrounds, as well, but going forward, we'll just be playing them for the intermission break. So we'll be back here in about 10 minutes or so. In the meantime, enjoy the character backstories. We'll see you guys in just a moment.

[dramatic music]

[character backstories]

[dramatic music]

MATT: Hello, everyone! Welcome back to Critical Role. First off, I want to thank the chat for buying this amazing cloak. This most delightful Dungeon Master Cloak.

TALIESIN: It makes your eyes pop.

MATT: Does it? It makes more than my eyes pop. (laughs) So thank you, chat, that's amazing. We did some videos with that. It's a little warm in here for it at the moment, but I'll be wearing it probably when we come back from the break for a bit, too. Thank you. A couple other quick things. First off, our shirts are up still. We have one more week on that, but our goal by the end of this show tonight is to get to 1,000 t-shirts sold. If we get to 1,000 before the end of the game tonight, we are going to stay after and do a Q&A with you guys. So, go ahead and get some shirts. Wonderfully modeled by a few of our team members here. You can find a link in the chat room, or you can go to teespring.com/critical-role and they've got hoodies, girl tees, guy tees. Rock it out.

LIAM: 999 gets nothing!

MATT: Well, we'll see. So yes, that's awesome. Also, we have the subscriber giveaway. As soon as we hit 2,850 tonight, we are going to be giving away one of the Tabletop Day promo kits that are only available exclusively now by subscribing to this channel. So, once we hit 2,850, we are going to give away one of these to one of the random folks in the chat room, so look forward to that. Also, we have our charity, which we do throughout the show. Marisha do you want to take it away on that?

MARISHA: Yes. 826LA, which is a non-profit, after-school tutoring program for kids K-12th grade. They excel in creative writing and reading. They're awesome. Donate to them. Go check them out. And there might be an 826 in your area, so google 826. They're always looking for tutors. It's a good program.

MATT: Go check it out. A couple of other quick things. If you guys haven't checked it out, recently I had the opportunity to Dungeon Master for PewDiePie and cinnamontoastken, his co-partner on the podcast there. Episode went up a couple of days ago. Had a lot of fun. Hopefully, we'll be doing that again in the future, but I know probably a bunch of you folks came through that this week, so welcome! Welcome to our chaotic little show, Critical Role. Everyone in the chat room: be nice, be welcoming. They've been really awesome. Any other announcements we want to make before we jump into the game?

ORION: Yeah. Have we talked about something important here, guys? There are these shirts that we need to sell.

LAURA: We just talked about them.

SAM: For five minutes. We literally just talked about that.

ORION: Listen, guys, this is something that we need to really discuss, first.

TRAVIS: That was amazing. He comes in character!

(all laugh)

ORION: I love you, Travis

TRAVIS: I love you. I love you!

ORION: I think you guys out there need to really look in your hearts– and moreover, your wallets– and get one of our shirts. Just get them, because they're dope.

MATT: Glowing recommendation from Tiberius Stormwind.

TALIESIN: I like that you two match, actually.

LAURA: The episode of Dread part 2 came out today– of TableTop. It's so intense! You can watch it on Geek & Sundry. I'm not telling you anything, but it's very intense!

TALIESIN: We can't talk about anything.

SAM: Did we talk about the shirts?

ORION: I don't think we did.

MATT: Let's get this on the road, then, so we can get into the story.

LAURA: I'm so nervous!

TRAVIS: (laughing) I don't want to live.
Part I

MATT: So. To get everyone caught up to where we are… The party was initially sent on a quest into the mountainous region beneath the dwarven city of Kraghammer to find a folk hero of the region named Lady Kima of Vord, who's a halfling paladin who had gone missing while on a vision quest that had apparently led her to some evil that was brewing beneath the city. As the party went in search of her, they ended up finding themselves climbing deeper and deeper into the Underdark, a very scary portion of the subterranean world, encountering numerous beasts and talking cellphones.

ORION: Sorry.

(all laugh)

SAM: Disadvantage.

MATT: Discovering that there was apparently an alliance that had been forged between the illithids, the mind flayers that lived down there, and the duergar, who normally are at odds. They've forged some sort of pact. Upon battling their way deeper into the cavernous regions below the lava-encrusted obsidian walls, they began to uncover a plot that apparently some monstrosity, some new dark leader by the name of K'Varn had been the one responsible for uniting them and currently resides in a temple in the center of the subterranean illithid city of Yug'Voril. You guys made your way down to what seems to be the cavern that contains the island that Yug'Voril resides upon. You manage to scavenge a few broken boats from the lake that surrounds the island. Percy repaired them, and you rode around the outskirts to what seemed to be some sort of a beach-side cavern. Upon entering the cavern, you found a partially-buried chest or container of some kind in what looks like a camp that had been destroyed and scattered, and a few rotting corpses against the walls. As you continued to inspect the area, the corpses began to rise from their sitting positions. With previous experience in the realm of undead, you, however, know that these eyes of these creatures carry far more intelligence than your run-of-the-mill zombie. And that was where we left off at this point in time, which requires a music change.

ASHLEY: Oh, just jumping right in?

LAURA: Just right into it.

MATT: Right in. We have a good number of the party that is still out in the boat that is being towed by Keyleth, currently in shark form.

ASHLEY: We're in a boat?

TALIESIN: We're in a boat.

ASHLEY: I'm in a boat. I'm in a motherfucking boat.

MATT: There's Keyleth's shark form.

LAURA: Where? Awesome.

MATT: Right there. So in the cavern, I believe we had Vax, we had Scanlan. Tiberius and Vex on the flying carpet and are making their way down. You scouted ahead and began to check the interior before this happened. So, these creatures are now rising up off the ground, looking insidious in their expression, all glaring at you, as you're the most apparently-nearby individual. What are you doing?

LAURA: You have fuzz in your hair.

MATT: And it's going to stay!

LAURA: No you got it. It's gone.

MATT: Aw, damn it.

MATT: I was hoping it would bother you for the rest of the game. So, that being the case, we're jumping right into battle at the top of this game in the center of this beach-side cavern. Roll initiative, everybody.

TRAVIS: Shit.

LAURA: God.

SAM: First roll of the night. Yeah!

TRAVIS: Fuck yes.

TALIESIN: Bam.

MARISHA: New dice. Not bad.

SAM: (wordless squeal)

MATT: All right, so top of the round. Who's got 25 to 20? Anybody?

TALIESIN: 25.

MATT: Ooh! Percy with the rolls. Okay, so 25–

TRAVIS AND LAURA: 20.

MATT: 20 and 20 for Grog and Vex. All right. 20 to 15?

ORION: 16.

MATT: 16 for Tiberius. 15 to ten?

LIAM: A really strong 13.

MATT: A really strong 13 for Vax.

MARISHA: 12. For the shark.

MATT: All right.

SAM: Me and Pike. Worst rollers in the game.

MATT: (laughs) Don't say that. You got this. You'll be fine.

SAM: Well, we roll well when it counts.

ASHLEY: Yeah, but for initiative, we always roll less.

MATT: Well, that's the plate armor and– I don't know why. And what have you guys got, initiative-wise?

SAM: Four.

ASHLEY: Oh, wow. I got seven.

MATT: Pike, then Scanlan. All right, so top of the round. Percy, you're out in the ship. Are you going to stay on the ship?

TALIESIN: (garbled) No.

MATT: (laughs)

TALIESIN: (garbled) These cookies are really good!

MATT: I know. Timing is everything. What are you doing? Quick!

TALIESIN: I'm going to tug on the rope three times in succession to let our shark friend know that it's time to boogie. I'm going to take the rope. I'm going to jump out of the boat. Is there anything to tie the rope to?

MATT: This beach is just gravel. There's no particular physical element. Maybe on the far end, there might be a part of the wall, but it's going to be an awkward hinge, and there's really nowhere to latch–

TALIESIN: Is there something that if I had an adhesive that I could–

MATT: Well, if you have an adhesive, you might be able to stick it to the wall at the far end of the beach– the cavern wall that you're up against– but there's nothing actually on the beach floor at all.

TALIESIN: I'm going to attempt to take the piece of rope, place it against the wall, and take an ice shot slightly above the rope and freeze it to the wall.

MATT: Okay. So as you hold it up, you line up your enchanted ice chamber of your Pepperbox, fire, and with an extremely loud echoing (gun noise) gun shot sound throughout the cavern, you see a blast. The bullet itself ricochets and spins off into the distance, into the darkness, but you do see left behind, where part of the rock has chiseled from the impact, ice has coalesced and cracked and has, for the time being, held the rope to the edge of the cavern.

TALIESIN: I'm running in, for the rest of my movement.

MATT: All right, so Percy is there. Percy, it's going to take you a few rounds to get there. It's long, winding pathway, but you're in the process of making your way there. All right, great, so that brings us to Grog and Vex. Grog and Vex, what have you got?

TRAVIS: Would you like to go?

LAURA: Well, you're outside. You can go.

TRAVIS: Is the boat beached on the shore yet?

MATT: No, the boat is not beached. The rope that the boat is attached to is currently attached to the wall, so it's anchored.

TRAVIS: Okay, good.

ASHLEY: And I'm in the boat?

MATT: You're in the boat. Grog's in the boat. Clarota, Kima…

TRAVIS: I would like to bust out at a full dead sprint after Percy. “There's no blood being had without me!”

MATT: As Grog leaps out, (sploosh) splashing. It's shallow at this point. You're about waist deep in the water. You trudge up to the shore, run across the gravel beach, and start heading straight into the cavern after Percy.

TRAVIS: Screaming.

MATT: Yelling into the cavern, a big old goliath scream. Laser pointer if anyone needs it, by the way. There you go. All right, that brings us to Vex.

LAURA: Which one looks biggest?

MATT: You're still on top of the flying carpet, the three of you.

LAURA: Does one of the ghouls look scarier than the others?

MATT: Best you can tell, there are three that all look similar in stature. There's one over here that is generally larger, taller, more lanky, and appears to have a semblance of armor on him still. And he almost seems to be giving looks and silent commands to the others.

LAURA: He's a master zombie. Hunter's Mark him.

MATT: What's the range on Hunter's Mark? You're back here.

TALIESIN: Hey, Laura!

LAURA: I did it! Hunter's Mark, 90 feet.

MATT: Yeah, you can get there.

LAURA: Okay, good. Well, I don't need it because I'm going to Conjure Barrage a cone at them all once he's Hunter's Marked.

SAM: Barrage a cone? Sounds like an Italian porn guy.

MATT: Hunter's Mark on that one.

LAURA: While I whistle for Trinket to get his butt in.

MATT: Trinket's ears perk up from the distance. He can hear your whistle echoing through the cavern on the beach side. He stumbles out of the boat, (sploosh) big splash, and chases after Grog.

LAURA: Okay, and then I Conjure Barrage.

MATT: All wet and soaked, the fur pushed against the body. Conjure Barrage. What's the range of that?

LAURA: It's a 60-foot cone.

MATT: You are quite a distance from most of them. You might have to hop off the flying carpet.

LAURA: I will?!

ORION: She can move it just fine. Just think, “forward.”

LAURA: Can we fly the carpet forward?

MATT: You're currently not in control of the carpet. Tiberius is.

LAURA: Can I delay until– what's your initiative?

ORION: Well, 16, but that's fine.

LAURA: I'll delay until his. Can I do that?

MATT: You can do that. Vex delays on that. Grog's turn's ended. All right, so the undead take their turn. So as all the entities rise up, they all swarm in, rushing around with an unnatural speed.

LIAM: Age ain't slowing them down nothing! Wow. Hi, fellas!

MATT: They all leap up. You see portions of their jaw dangling, with these sharp, awful blackened teeth that are broken and gnarled.

LIAM: I feel so popular!

MATT: You glance around suddenly as this darkened room, which you're able to make a little bit of light from Tiberius's light on the end of his staff. They move (whoosh) with a blur of speed, and they're right up in your face.

TALIESIN: 28 Days Later zombies.

LAURA: Oh, god. Get out of the middle of them.

MATT: First thing you notice: one of them is giving off an awful stench. The smell you smelled when you first entered the cavern is now so strong that it's nearly overpowering.

LIAM: Is there one specifically?

MATT: It's hard to find a source to it. However, you are taking a claw strike from each of them.

LIAM: Oh, good.

MATT: That is going to be a six. That misses.

MATT: That is a 19?

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: Hits. 18?

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: And then 20.

LIAM: Hell yeah.

MATT: All right. So, three claw strikes. You take seven points of slashing damage, another seven points of slashing damage, and then a ten, so that's a total of 24 points of slashing damage.

LIAM: Okay. (grunts)

MATT: As all these horribly-muddied and half-rotted claws start sinking past the armor into your flesh, the back of your neck. One catches you in the side. And it all happens so fast, you feel like you're almost spun around by the sheer force of the impact. I need you to make three constitution saving throws.

SAM: They've got poison or something. They've got poison magic.

LIAM: Okay. 15.

LAURA: Okay. Plus your constitution.

LIAM: Plus nothing.

LAURA: Oh really?!

LIAM: It's all in speed, man. 15.

MATT: 15.

LIAM: Six.

MATT: All right.

LIAM: 19.

MATT: Okay. So, two of the impacts, you feel this sense of strange rot impeding upon your system, and you shrug it off, but one of them still manages to sift through, and your system seizes. You feel all the muscles in your body begin to tighten up, and suddenly you are unable to move. Your entire body is one tense, giant, flexing muscle, and you're unable to shift anywhere from your position.

LIAM: (strained) Feels like rigor mortis.

MATT: You're currently paralyzed, my friend.

LAURA: Oh no, I can't do anything. You won't be able to dodge it.

MATT: Yeah, all right. That brings us to Tiberius and Vex.

LIAM: Send a fireball right here.

LAURA AND SAM: No!

TRAVIS: That would be bad.

ORION: How far away am I right now?

MATT: Right here? I'd say you're approximately–

ORION: Well, I'll move the carpet the minimum distance I have to for her to get in range.

MATT: You can probably push it 20 feet. It's about there.

ORION: Okay, so that's where I'll stay. “This doesn't look good.” I cast Obelisk of Stone on my dear friend. (fshh) I'm going to raise him up out of harm's way.

MATT: All right. So, as you finish casting, you can see some of the actual sand that fills the bottom of this cave begins to swirl up in a wind around Tiberius's hands, and as he lifts his arms up, a single column of stone shakes and shifts out of the ground, lifting your paralyzed body 15 feet into the air. Thankfully, the actual cavern itself is about 25 feet tall, so it doesn't crush you against the ceiling.

ORION: No, I only raise it about 20 feet.

MATT: It can only go 15 feet for level three. Or 20. I'm sorry. 20 feet. So, you're barely brought up to the ceiling. It crests the top of your head, but not enough to actually crush you or do any damage. But you are seemingly out of harm's way from the current undead onslaught.

ORION: And then I go, “That was a good idea!” And then I spend three sorcerer points and I hock a fireball (fwoosh) at all those fuckers, too.

MATT: All right, so Tiberius, as you lift up the pillar with one hand, the dust settles and falls from your hand, and as it does this hand back here begins to coalesce this small bead of red burning energy. You fling it out with your off hand. It streaks across, hits the base of the pillar, and explodes with a blast of red fiery magical energy. Go ahead and roll damage. Your DC on that is 17, right?

ORION: Yes. Two, four, six. Is it six or eight?

MATT: They all failed their saving throw. It's 8d6.

SAM: 8d6?! Jeez. Seems unfair.

MATT: Same damage your Lightning Bolt does.

SAM: Oh, you're right. Man, I'm a bad mama jama.

ORION: 32 damage.

MATT: 32 damage. So. As you guys are running into the cavern, you hear this loud, familiar explosion sound that has this weird dull thud. And then flaming heat. You see flickers of light from around the bend, and this wave of heat hits you. The explosion, as it finishes, you can see these three undead are completely incinerated and are left as burning cinders on the ground. This one's still standing. However, the force of the explosion also destroys the pillar from underneath.

SAM: Oh!

ORION: Oh, shit.

(all laugh)

MATT: Causing him to fall.

ORION: Hold on, as he falls– do I still have a movement after this?

MATT: You used your movement to move the carpet, sorry.

MARISHA: It's like the Tower of Terror.

LIAM: How much bludgeoning damage am I taking?

MATT: You only take, I'd say, 2d6.

LIAM: Okay.

MATT: No, 1d6, because it's only a 20-foot fall.

LIAM: Right, okay.

MATT: You're able to catch yourself, and it's also sand, so it's not too hard. All right, that finishes your turn?

ORION: It certainly does. “Vex, would you finish that bastard off?”

MATT: Wait, you did land in a bunch of rocks of the broken pillar. Roll another d6 points of damage.

LIAM: That was more substantial.

MATT: If it was the sand, it wasn't so hard, but it was the fact that I realized there was a whole crapton of pillar rubble that your paralyzed body fell upon, unable to brace your fall. So. That's going to hurt in the morning. Vex, you're up.

LAURA: Okay. Well, there's “no” really anybody else, so I'm going to…

TRAVIS: (teasing) There's “no” really?

LAURA: There's “no” really anybody else– I can shoot through my fire thing, right?

MATT: If you want to, yeah. You still haven't used it for the day.

LAURA: Should I save it?

LAURA: I'll attack him twice.

MATT: Okay, you're attacking him twice. As you're sitting on the carpet, you pull out (schwoop, schwoop) and rapidly release two arrows in succession.

LAURA: Oh, natural 20!

(all cheer)

MATT: Yeah! All right. And what's the other attack?

LAURA: 21.

MATT: Both hit. Go ahead and roll damage.

LAURA: Hit him. Oh, actually, 23. I forgot I had bracers on.

MATT: That hits. Well, the bracers only affect your damage, not to hit.

LAURA: Good to know! 21!

MATT: You get plus two to all damage rolls with ranged attacks.

LAURA: What do I do for a critical, then?

MATT: You roll the regular damage, multiply it by two, and then add your modifier at the end.

LAURA: Okay. Oh, that's not that good. 15 for the first one. And 12 for the second one.

MATT: And Hunter's Mark on both of those?

LAURA: And Hunter's Mark on both!

MATT: Because it's on the board? (laughs)

LAURA: That was definitely a six. That was a six!

MATT: There you go!

LAURA: Seven, then, for Hunter's Mark.

MATT: The smoke filters out of the way, and you make the visual. You see your brother on the ground, currently seizing, and in the rubble, you see the shadow of one of the undead, still standing angrily. It rears back with its claws forward and gives this horrible gnashing sound as its jaw opens and actually widens. This long tongue (wet sucking noise) whips out on it. As you bear down and release one arrow, (shoomf) piercing the side of its shoulder. As it reaches out to break it off, its tongue still out, the second one goes into the tongue, out the back of the throat. (choking noise) It reaches up and breaks off the arrow in the throat, looks towards you, goes to lunge, and as it does, you can see it just collapses on top of his body, no longer moving.

TRAVIS: Embrace him. Embrace him!

LIAM: Give me some sugar.

MATT: All right, so. The rest of you finally make your way into the cavern. You manage to shrug off the rest of this paralyzation, stiffly get up, and find your way out of the rubble.

LAURA: Can we land? Tiberius?

ORION: I'm sorry. Yes.

TRAVIS: Tell me it's not over.

SAM: Oh. Sorry, Grog. The fight's over.

ORION: Sorry, Grog.

TRAVIS: I live for one thing.

ASHLEY: Am I close enough to get out of the boat?

MATT: Yeah, you can get out of the boat.

LAURA: Are you alive?

LIAM: I'm alive.

MATT: Keyleth, you're left out there as a shark as everyone goes inside.

LAURA: I go look at the treasure chest.

SAM: I'm going, too!

LIAM: Good job, badasses.

MARISHA: I'll stay with the boat.

TALIESIN: All right, that was… fine.

ASHLEY: I didn't even need to get out of the boat. You guys just handled it like that.

TALIESIN: I'll go back to the boat, then. It's fine. I don't care.

ORION: I'm sorry, Percy. Listen, I'm sorry, everybody. I didn't mean to kill everybody so quickly. I'll let you kill everybody next time, Percy.

MATT: Vex, you go over and lift the top of the chest, which was unlocked previously by your brother. As you lift it up, for a split second you see what looks like a flash of orange energy– a very familiar one, as suddenly, a secondary fire blast (explosion sound) emanates from the treasure chest itself.

LAURA: I thought you checked for traps.

LIAM: I didn't do nothing!

(others laugh)

MATT: The blast radius sends the top half of the chest careening off and scraping off the roof of the cavern. You guys, who just turned the corner, see this giant explosion, sending you about 20 feet backwards.

LAURA: Awesome. Good thing you didn't get there in time, Scanlan.

LIAM: Is that chest ten feet away from me, as well?

MATT: Yeah. So a reflex saving throw for both of you.

LAURA: Okay, cool.

LIAM: I have a thing I can do, too.

LAURA: What's reflex? Is that dexterity?

MATT: Or dexterity, sorry. (sing-song) Carry over from Pathfinder. I meant dexterity.

LAURA: 30.

MATT: 30? Jesus Christ.

LIAM: This is a dexterity check?

MATT: Yeah.

LIAM: 20.

MATT: You both manage to find a way to dodge most of the impact, but you still both take 14 points of fire damage.

LIAM: As a rogue with evasion, if I succeed, it's nothing.

MATT: Then you take nothing.

LAURA: As a twin of a rogue…

MATT: You take 14 points of fire damage.

LAURA: Can I have your thingy?

LIAM: My thingy?

LAURA: Your eraser thingy?

LIAM: I don't know where it is.

LAURA: Oh, thanks.

ASHLEY: You're welcome.

MATT: The familiar whine of the trap catches your ear. You dodge out of the way instinctively. Your sister's not so lucky. You take the brunt of the damage, but not the full damage.

LAURA: Oh no. Did I destroy the loot?

MATT: If you want to inspect what the chest once was. As you go back to where the chest was, most of the chest is destroyed. It's knocked off its hinge. What you do find inside, though, is what looks like a very, very… There we go. What looks like a slightly-charred two-handed blade: a giant sword that is currently laid inside. Looks like it's been there a while in storage. There was a set of natural armor that's been completely destroyed by the blast.

LAURA: Aw, come on!

MATT: There are a number of coins in there. There's probably a good, hefty pile of gold, slightly molded by the moisture that's been kept inside this chest until it was detonated. Gathering it up, you find approximately 420 gold pieces.

SAM: Yeah, 420.

LIAM: What's that mean? Is that a reference? What is that?

MATT: But for everything that was damaged inside the chest, the sword, which would be considered a greatsword, seems to be largely unaffected by the blast, other than a little bit of soot that you had to rub off the blade.

LAURA: I'll take it to Grog, because I figure he'll probably be able to use it.

MATT: There you go. She hands you this fantastic sword.

LAURA: I don't know if it's magic or anything, Grog, so you might want to have Tiberius have a look at it.

TRAVIS: “Hold on, let me check.” I take it and I shake it really hard.

ORION: That's not how you really–

TRAVIS: I think I know what I'm doing. All right, here. You can check it.

ORION: As he's doing that, I get 18 trying to see what's up.

MATT: Okay, there's definitely a magical aura emanating from the blade. You take a moment to inspect it, and you ascertain the magical nature.

ORION: What you have there is a Greatsword of Frenzy, Grog. You have a plus one bonus to attack and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. Ooh! When you attack a creature with this magic weapon and roll a 20 on the attack roll, after dealing damage, you can immediately make an additional attack for free.

TRAVIS: Glad I shook it.

LAURA: Pass that piece of paper over here.

SAM: Maybe Scanlan could use it.

MATT: Scanlan could. It's a little big for you. You'd be at quite a disadvantage using this weapon.

TRAVIS: Give it over here. A Greatsword of Frenzy?

SAM: I'd like to rage frenzy. Are there any bodies that we can look at?

MATT: You guys were inspecting what remains of three of the undead creatures. They have been turned to ash, pretty much, from the force of the explosion, the arcane nature of the detonation. You find pieces of them. Most of them have been charred and burned away from the bodies, who are already in partially-decomposed form. The larger one that you had Hunter's Marked, though. Upon inspecting it, while most of its armor is destroyed, it does manage to carry a partially-mildewed coin purse. Looking inside, you only find about five or six pieces of gold, but you do find one really, really nice… looks like it's taken a little bit of damage, but it was once a really pretty diamond.

LAURA: I'm just going to keep this with the party gold.

SAM: With the party treasury? Oh, sure.

LAURA: Plus one diamond to the treasury.

ORION: “Vex, let me see the diamond for just one second.” As he's shaking his sword, I go into the Bag of Holding and take out the Mending Wheel.

LAURA: Did you turn it back into coal?

ORION: That's not how it works, Vex.

MATT: Tiberius, you reach into the Bag of Holding. You pull out the Mending Wheel, which is a magical artifact that you found earlier in the campaign as part of your personal quest. It looks like a large, spoked, roulette wheel when it's laying down, with these strange points that fold out of it. Once you spin the wheel, you place an object in the center of the wheel. It's lifted without gravity and mends itself back to its undamaged form. You place the diamond in the center and spin the wheel. You can see the actual cracks on the surface of it slowly begin to mend. Eventually, the diamond is brought to a solid, undamaged, finely-cut example of a diamond.

LAURA: Whoa, sparkles!

ORION: There you go.

ASHLEY: It's so pretty!

SAM: What time of day?

MATT: You have no idea.

SAM: How long has it been since we rested?

MATT: It hasn't been too terribly long. You rested at the camp after taking out Queen Ulara, so I'd say it's probably been about– with the travel to get to this point, probably about six hours since you rested.

TRAVIS: Plus, nobody is hurt.

LAURA: Well, he's hurt.

TRAVIS: Well, I'm not hurt.

LAURA: Can I perception check around the cave?

MATT: Go ahead and roll perception.

SAM: Can I remind our party of a couple things? Pike, might be a good time to try to heal Vax's foot again. And also, while we have a moment, did we ever discern what is in that yellow vial?

ORION: Oh this thing?

SAM: Yeah, do we know what this is?

ORION: I'll do an arcana check on the vial, which is not great. “I don't know, it looks icky.”

SAM: Let me take a look, as well. Ooh, yes. 24.

MATT: You take a look at the liquid and it looks enchanted, but the way its mixture is, the colors seem to swirl and shift in a very caustic way. You can see from glancing at the glass vial it's contained in, the interior of the glass looks slightly pock-marked, almost like the viscous fluid within has actually damaged the glass slightly.

SAM: It sounds bad. Bad news.

MATT: You're unable to really ascertain what the nature of the liquid is, but those are the details you can make out, currently.

ASHLEY: I went over to Vax's foot again.

LAURA: Oh no, come on! Don't!

(all laugh)

SAM: There's a little zombie poo on it.

LAURA: I'm getting real tired of your shit.

LIAM: Ever since we were five.

LAURA: I rolled 22 on perception, by the way.

MATT: All right. Make a medicine check.

ORION: Does this cave bottleneck?

MATT: It ends here. This is the end of the cave. It curved around and ended in this little portion here. So you had a perception check? What did you roll?

LAURA: 22.

MATT: 22.

LAURA: Yes, yes, yes!

SAM: Oh, snap.

MARISHA: Secrets.

TRAVIS: The second whisper.

SAM: Get down into frame! Lower into frame. Pull them down.

ORION: Pull them down.

SAM: Ladies and gentlemen, we have a bunch of shirts to sell tonight.

LAURA: (quietly) I think maybe…

LIAM: You look weird. What's up?

LAURA: We should not be hanging out in this room right now. Can I try to get a better look at what I saw?

MATT: You see, best you can, and you guys follow her eyeline. You look up, and you see what first looks like it's part of the cavern ceiling. It has this weird texture. It looks almost like the smooth rock that the interior of the cavern comes off as. However, as you see it shift and move, it looks almost like a portion of it is moving and slowly crawling, and it looks like there's a red gleaming eye, and then two, and something drops down from the side, almost like a tail that seems to dangle for a second. At which point, it detaches. (fwoosh) Opens up almost like a giant ray, with a screeching mouth that (screeches) screams at you. It lands down in the center of the room.

ASHLEY: I rolled a nine for medicine, just B-T-W.

(all laugh)

LIAM: How's my foot doing these days?

MATT: Your foot is still healing, but unfortunately, based on the medicine roll, it is getting better but not enough to complete the process of you getting all your toes back.

ASHLEY: I saw that thing out of the corner of my eye and was just distracted.

ORION: You guys want to run?

SAM: Oh, what is that thing?

LAURA: It's a big ray of death. I don't know.

LIAM: It does look like a flying manta ray.

MATT: Let's roll some initiative, folks.

LAURA: Ugh!

ASHLEY: Ugh, come on!

SAM: Get out of this cave.

LIAM: Cheeky bastard.

ASHLEY: Oh, really? Really? I just rolled a natural 20. Why couldn't I get that for medicine?

MATT: That's how it works.

MARISHA: Just throwing it out there: still the shark with the boat.

LAURA: Ugh, double 20s on the table.

LIAM: Natural 20.

MARISHA: If you guys want to run, the keys are in the car. The engine's warmed up, ready to go. I've got the key turned on. It's nice and cozy. That's such a good roll, though. That's a good initiative roll.

MATT: So at this, this thing leaps out from almost nowhere. The only reason you picked it up is your acute vision, and as it lands, it's right around the corner from the two of you, and it has this long, almost spined tail and this jaw that opens up, this nasty, toothy gaping maw. All right. Initiative rolls of 25 to 20?

TALIESIN: 22.

MATT: 22.

TRAVIS: 21.

LIAM: 25.

MATT: 25. All right.

TRAVIS: And the shark.

MARISHA: 20.

ASHLEY: 20.

MATT: Nice. All right. What were you?

TALIESIN: 22.

TRAVIS: Plus Ash's was natural 20.

MATT: And Grog, what was yours again?

TRAVIS: 21.

MATT: All right.

MATT: 20 to 15?

ORION: 18.

MATT: 18 for Tiberius. 15 to ten?

SAM: 11.

MATT: 11 for Scanlan.

LAURA: Ten.

MATT: Ten.

ASHLEY: Sorry, Scanlan.

SAM: It's all right. I'll see you next match.

MARISHA: We're all over ten, though. That's pretty good, guys. We should be proud of that.

MATT: All right, so top of the round. As this creature sits there, it's giving off this weird, horrible moaning sound (screeches) that's starting to just fill your ears. At the top of the round is Vax.

LAURA: What should we do? Command us.

LIAM: Command us?

LAURA: Do you want us to stay?

LIAM: Run!

(all laugh)

LIAM: We've never done it before!

LAURA: We've never run!

TRAVIS: Let's see what happens!

LIAM: What the hell is it called? My quick action to dash.

LAURA: Just leaving me?

LIAM: Yeah!

LAURA: You're leaving me behind?

LIAM: Can I grab her by the scruff and run?

MATT: If you want to try and move her, you'll basically move both of you. You can do that, but you'll have no other action.

LIAM: That's what I want to do.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: Grabbing my sister.

MATT: Grab your sister.

ORION: Get on the damn carpet, you fools!

LAURA: (groaning) Can it fit us?

MATT: Currently, you guys would be able to get onto the carpet.

LAURA: We jump onto the carpet!

ASHLEY: What if he flies?

LAURA: He probably does.

MATT: What?! Why would a giant winged-thing fly?

ASHLEY: (laughs) He looks like he flies, guys.

SAM: Wait! Can we have an aerial battle over water? Let's do it!

MATT: Percy.

TALIESIN: I'm on the boat.

MATT: No, you're not on the boat. You guys have come into the cavern after this point, when you gave chase. You guys are in the cavern.

TALIESIN: I started heading back to the boat.

MATT: Oh, you did? Then yeah, you're still out by the boat.

TALIESIN: So I just heard someone yell, “run.” So I'm going to start unhooking the boat. I'm getting the boat ready to go.

MATT: You take the butt of your gun and you start bashing against the ice that you set against the wall. It cracks, and eventually you get the rope free from the side of the wall.

TALIESIN: And I'm bringing the boat around so that people can get on really quick.

MATT: Okay. That brings us to Grog.

TRAVIS: I would like to rage… and run!

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Passing as many people as I can!

MATT: All right!

TRAVIS: Rage running! (frantic noises)

MATT: Okay. So you just bolt out. I say rage run and barbarian speed, you're going to get nearly completely out of the cavern.

LIAM: His knees are really high in the air!

MATT: Keyleth! Are you staying out in shark form at the boat?

MARISHA: Yeah, I guess. I feel Percy unhook, and I start the forward momentum. Pointing that direction?

MATT: Okay! All right. Pike.

ASHLEY: Oh wow, I'm up so soon! Okay, I'm going to start running!

MATT: All right! So you turn and run. You catch up to Grog, because he traveled twice the distance that you could have with your tiny little gnome legs in your full-plate armor. You're like (grunt). Plus, it's sand, so your feet are sinking with each step. It's rough for you to get around because of your size and the terrain.

ASHLEY: Can I jump on his leg or back?

MATT: You can try to.

ASHLEY: All right.

MATT: All right! Make an athletics check. With disadvantage, because you're in full-plate armor.

LIAM: Nothing's free! (laughing) You've got to roll for everything.

ASHLEY: All right. We got a 19. And we got a nine.

MATT: All right. What's your strength? What was your athletics? Total.

ASHLEY: My athletics is a one, total.

MATT: So that brings you to a ten. Ten is what you needed. So, as you run up, you leap and grab onto Grog's back. Grog, I want you to make a–

ASHLEY: Wait, no! Hold on. I need to be honest. I rolled an eight. My athletics is a one, so doesn't that make me nine?

MATT: That makes you a nine.

ASHLEY: Sorry.

TRAVIS: Look at that honor code!

LAURA: That was good, because I was going to let it go.

MATT: So! As you jump to grab onto the back of Grog's back, you manage to find purchase. Grog instinctually reaches back with an elbow and hits you right in the side of the armor, which knocks you flat on your back. You're currently prone in the sand right there. And Grog just keeps running. You glance over your shoulder for a second, but because you're raging, you don't see her. You just see shadows in the cavern.

TRAVIS: (screaming in panic)

MATT: So you start moving your hand in the air, freaking out. Holding your axe in one hand and your greatsword in the other, just (panicked screaming).

ASHLEY: (laughing) Oh my god, that's hilarious.

TRAVIS: Whack! Boom! Oh my god.

ASHLEY: That's all right. I'm tough!

MATT: The large, ray-like, cloaked creature swoops down towards the top of the–

ASHLEY: Oh, shoot. We've got to get out of here!

TRAVIS: (laughing) Sorry.

LIAM: It's a good thing we ran!

LAURA: Oh yeah. Does it even matter?

LAURA: No, it's just going to attack us.

LIAM: We just gave up a turn.

MATT: All right. It's going to make a bite attack against Tiberius and a tail attack against Scanlan. So it's the two that are immediately visible to it. So the bite attack against you, Tiberius. That's going to be a 21.

ORION: Yeah, that hits.

MATT: The bite attack against you is going to be a 23.

(all laugh)

MATT: The tail (whapsh) whips around as you're on top of the carpet, about to try to get everyone out of there. You turn around and see this thing go piercing by. It strikes across your chest. Your armor takes most of the damage, but you can feel the bruise underneath. It doesn't actually pierce the skin, but you take seven points of damage from the impact of the tail.

MATT: Tiberius!

ORION: Yes?

MATT: All right, it comes out and sinks its teeth into your form, across your shoulder area, and it bites down. You end up taking–

ORION: You're ruining my robe! (grunts)

MATT: (laughing) Ten points of piercing damage.

MARISHA: Oh no.

LIAM: (squishing noise)

MATT: And the creature wraps around you, (squelch) completely envelops you.

SAM: Him, or me, or both?

MATT: Him. It completely surrounds you and wraps you like a blanket. All of a sudden, your vision goes dark. You feel yourself like (muffled yelling). You're unable to really move. You are blind and unable to breathe. The air is not able to get to you at this time.

TRAVIS: Shit.

LIAM: It is poppycock.

MATT: So! That's going to end its turn. Tiberius, your turn.

ORION: Well. (grunts) Fire breath!

MATT: Okay!

LAURA: Oh, that's good!

ORION: (roaring) Get off of me!

MATT: Because it's attached to your head, it's going to have disadvantage. So I think it's– is it a dexterity saving throw? Its head is right by your mouth. Go ahead and roll damage. I rolled a natural 20 and a six. So because of the disadvantage, it does not make its save.

ORION: So, wisdom?

LIAM: d6 times something, I think.

MATT: Yeah. Roll the damage for your fire breath.

ORION: How many d6?

LIAM: Depends on your level.

MATT: Depends on your level, as a dragonborn.

ORION: Oh! Hang on.

MATT: Should be on your sheet.

ORION: Is it… no…

MATT: No, no, it's… Here, I'll… No! It's part of the dragonborn ability. Let me pull it up real fast.

ORION: I don't want to roll wrong. I think it's 2d6.

LIAM: That's for a low level.

LAURA: You know nothing here.

TRAVIS: Your powers are worthless.

SAM: If only there was a way.

TALIESIN: If there was some book that had all this information available.

MATT: It is 3d6 at 6th level.

ORION: Oh! Awesome. Cool.

TALIESIN: Some ancient tome which suddenly answers everything.

ORION: (panting in relief) 21!

MATT: 21 points of damage. You all hear a muffled (explosion sound) as bits of flame begin to shoot out from the corners of where it's wrapping around the torso of Tiberius, surrounding his head. The creature's tail flicks around in pain. You hear this muffled (screeching) sound as it keeps, still tight around his head, fighting through the damage and maintaining its hold on him.

ORION: If I do something, I'll probably have disadvantage. Right? Correct? Well, I'll just try it again. I'll spend… fuck. Jeez. No!

LAURA: Don't spend all your sorcerer's points!

ORION: No, I fly around and (ping) hit one of my stones, and I'll spend… five sorcerer points to cast Telekinesis and (blast sound) fling it off me.

MATT: Okay! All right. We're going to do a contested roll on this.

LIAM: It's a contest. It's like an arm wrestle. It's like arm wrestling with dice.

ORION: Oh, yeah! Arcana?

MATT: Well, no. For this, I believe it's the roll plus your spell modifier. Should be five. So roll a d20, add five to it.

ORION: 20.

MATT: 20! All right. So, your Ioun stone is floating around your head, which is currently surrounded by the creature. It's clinging to your head; you can feel it grinding into the top of your skull. You instill the Ioun stone to trigger. As you do, the force begins to pull it (grunt) off of, and flings it off of your head. The creature is detached and thrown back at that point of the wall, off of you.

ORION: (grunts) Good! I use my movement to get the hell out of there! (grunts)

MATT: All right. They move out that way.

MARISHA: Trinket, run!

LAURA: It's not my turn yet! Tell him to go!

MATT: Scanlan, are you staying on the carpet? Anything else you want to do?

SAM: I am staying on the carpet. Wait! Is Pike off the carpet?

ASHLEY: I'm laying in the dirt.

MATT: Pike's laying in the dirt right now.

SAM: Okay! I will jump off the carpet, grab her, and say, “Pike. Come with me if you want to live.”

(all laugh)

SAM: And I just hold her really tight, and I sniff her hair, and it smells like strawberries.

TALIESIN: Got to make it weird, man.

ASHLEY: (laughs)

SAM: And then I Dimension Door us to the boat.

MARISHA: Aw! That's cute!

MATT: As Scanlan grabs you and holds you for a second, for a moment you're confused, and you hear that strange shrieking moan in the distance, and suddenly the darkness gives way to this flash of purple arcane energy, and the two of you (boof) fall a few inches into hard wood, and you feel the boat rock for a second as you're now on the outside in the boat, being tugged by Keyleth the shark.

ASHLEY: Scanlan! Thanks!

SAM: Don't worry! That hard wood is the boat.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: I have to applaud.

MATT: Okay! Vex!

LAURA: Trinket! Run!

MATT: (bear moan) Trinket runs up. Are you staying on the carpet?

LAURA: I jump off the carpet, climb on Trinket, and we take off!

MATT: All right. You jump on top of your bear, and you start bolting down the hallway. All right, that ends your turn. Clarota just (whoosh) vanishes. Kima (laughing) goes running on her halfling legs towards the flying carpet. She takes her full turn and she just manages to get on top of the carpet, and that's her turn. And she goes, “Go, go, go, go!”

ORION: I am going!

MATT: (laughing) All right. So, for the time being, we'll say you guys manage to (whoosh) make your way outside of the cavern to the ship.

SAM: For now.

TALIESIN: Up, up, up.

LAURA: Can you go? Oh, you're a shark.

MATT: Being towed.

LAURA: Damn it!

TALIESIN: We're fine.

LAURA: Wonder how far this thing can fly.

TRAVIS: Well, we'll find out real quick.

TALIESIN: We have lots of ways to hurt it before it gets there. We have arrows and guns. We're fine.

MATT: As you guys all get into the boat–

MARISHA: (laughing) Follow the Macy's Day balloon shark.

SAM: (shushing) This is the craziest thing ever.

MATT: As Keyleth begins to pull away, the boat picks up speed into the water, and you hear that moan sound begin to get louder as the creature (swoosh) out of the cavern, giving chase.

TALIESIN: I take a shot.

MATT: All right, so! For the purposes of this–

TALIESIN: You've been waiting to use this!

SAM: This is a James Bond water chase!

(all laugh)

MATT: All right, so going off, same top of the round. Vax, you're up first.

LIAM: Okay, so I throw a dagger at the McRay there.

MATT: Due to its distance, the darkness behind it, and the fact that you are in a boat, you are at a disadvantage on both your attack rolls.

LIAM: Plus I had a one on the first one.

MATT: So you super miss on that one.

LIAM: No, it was a seven plus… 13 on the second.

MATT: Okay, so you throw both daggers. (whoosh whoosh) Unfortunately, it's hard to make the form of the creature. It seems to almost– I can't say change its color, but it embraces the shadows around it, and it gets harder and harder to see. And for a moment, you swear you see two more appear at its sides.

LIAM: Oh. Mirror images!

SAM: Oh no.

MATT: You fling both daggers, and they vanish into the darkness and return to your side. That ends your turn. Percy, you're up.

TALIESIN: All right! I'm going to take a dead-eye sharpshooter shot. I'm going hardcore with this. So, with Bad News, I'm sitting down.

MATT: So you've leaned your giant sniper cannon that you've constructed up against the side of the boat, aim it up, best you can, and take a shot. You are at disadvantage for this shot.

TALIESIN: I'm at advantage for this shot!

MATT: So it cancels out. It's just a regular shot.

TALIESIN: Regular shot.

LIAM: Come on!

TALIESIN: 13.

LIAM: Beautiful human.

MATT: 13?

TALIESIN: Yeah.

MATT: 13 unfortunately misses.

TALIESIN: Damn it!

MATT: (gun blast sound) The ship actually rocks from the impact of the explosion. For a second there, you all feel like it's going to list and take on water.

LAURA: Are we all on the boat, or are some people still on the carpet?

ORION: No, a bunch of people are on the carpet.

MATT: Who's on the carpet still?

TRAVIS: We're in the boat.

LAURA: We didn't all fit in the boat! That's why we didn't all take the boat originally.

ORION: I'm still on the carpet!

MATT: Okay. Tiberius is still on the carpet.

LAURA: You're the only one still on the carpet, then.

TRAVIS: Like I said.

TALIESIN: By the way, if anyone wants to make us a little six-square carpet, that would be awesome!

MARISHA: If someone crocheted us a little single-square magic carpet?

ORION: That'd be so fun.

MARISHA: So we could put it on our little floaty deal.

TALIESIN: And I reload.

MATT: So you go ahead and reload. Yeah, that'll be your turn. That comes up to Grog!

TRAVIS: How close is Manta Ray?

MATT: The creature is approximately… 40ish feet away, at an angle, so it's about 50 feet away from you, up in the air.

LAURA: How long is that chain on the axe?

TRAVIS: I was going to do something else.

MATT: You can try and shift your weight to the back of the boat and get closer with your movement, if you want.

TRAVIS: I don't think the chain's long enough. 50 feet long? Is the Chain of Returning long enough to get to him?

MATT: You can certainly try.

TRAVIS: (laughing) I'm going to hold off. I would like to hold off, and maybe he'll come closer, since I seem to be an intimate sort of fellow.

MATT: All right, cool. Keyleth. You're pulling the boat?

MARISHA: I'm going to use a run action, just double speed. I feel action above, and I'm just shark instincts.

MATT: Okay. So you manage to get some distance for the ship, pulling it further behind.

MARISHA: Yeah, I have a swim speed of 40.

MATT: You're moving slower than that because you're pulling it, towing the entire boat behind you, so you're going 20, but you're putting distance between you and the creature, for the rest of the party, which makes it harder for it to catch up. All right, that brings us to Pike!

ASHLEY: Okay! I'm going to send a Guiding Bolt to the flying manta ray. So, I have to roll and see if it hits?

MATT: Yes. Add your spell modifier to it. Oh, you found your sheet?

ASHLEY: Yeah, I did.

MATT: Awesome.

ASHLEY: It doesn't hit. It's 12.

MATT: 12 does not hit, unfortunately. Once again, you fire and you think you hit one of them, but it seems to hit one of the group of three that's now flying overhead, and one shimmers and vanishes, seemingly unaffected by the bolt, but that one image of it disappears.

ASHLEY: Can I do anything else? Since I'm just sitting.

MATT: No, not unless you want to move somewhere in the boat.

ASHLEY: No. Dang it!

MATT: All right. It's now its turn. It is going to move. It gains up on the boat to about there. It actually gets a little lower. It's starting to gain on you guys, make its way (shh) gliding down towards the front, and you see now there's now two of them side by side that are coming down towards you guys.

SAM: Are those real?

LAURA: I don't know.

MATT: It's then that that strange moaning sound it's making (moans) begins to grow louder and louder, and all of you close your ears for a second. Everybody, make a wisdom saving throw.

MARISHA: Including me?

MATT: You don't actually hear in the water. You're muffled.

MARISHA: I'm in the water, yeah.

MATT: It's to the point where it doesn't actually affect you. Plus, you're in shark form.

ORION: Oh crap, wisdom?

MATT: Yes.

ORION: Aw!

SAM: (laughs)

MATT: All right. Scanlan?

SAM: I rolled a two, but my wisdom is negative two.

(all laugh)

SAM: So I'm at a zero.

MATT: All right. Tiberius?

ORION: I rolled a four.

MATT: Four. Percy?

TALIESIN: One.

MATT: One? Oh no. Grog?

LAURA: Oh no! Our whole party!

TRAVIS: 13.

ASHLEY: 12.

LAURA: 11.

LIAM: 14.

SAM: Oh boy!

TALIESIN: We are killing it!

MATT: Grog and Vex. Now let's see. You rolled a what?

LAURA: I rolled an 11.

MATT: 11? Okay, yeah, so, no. Vax however, is okay. So, Kima, Vax, and Grog, and Clarota all hear this horrible moaning sound and plug their ears and shake it off, not a problem. Everyone else–

SAM: Instant peril.

MATT: This creature– all of a sudden, its form becomes far more frightening than you ever saw before. It almost seems to swell with the cavern.

ORION: Is it casting a spell?

MATT: It's a natural ability. All of you are considered frightened.

ORION: Oh my lord!

SAM: Is it charming us?

MATT: Nope. It is not a charm effect. It is a fear effect. You are scared of it, currently.

LAURA: Trinket is immune to being scared. It doesn't matter, because I'm scared.

MATT: You're scared. Trinket's not affected, but you are. Essentially, until the end of its next turn, it's disadvantage on all attack rolls, and you cannot move closer to it.

TRAVIS: Can I take that turn now?

MATT: You can take that turn now, yeah. As it's moaning.

TRAVIS: Now, since I shook it off, I'm like, “That's lovely,” and I would like to try, for the first time, Intimidating Presence.

SAM: Is that a spell?

TRAVIS: On a creature within 30 feet.

MATT: It would be within 30 feet. Turn around.

ASHLEY: Get it!

LAURA: Get it Grog, get it!

TRAVIS: (yells)

(all laugh)

MATT: All right, so what's the DC on that?

TRAVIS: 13.

MATT: 13 for what kind of saving throw?

TRAVIS: Wisdom saving throw.

MATT: Okay, for the creature. Wisdom saving throw. It rolls a 12.

(all cheer)

MATT: So after it does this moaning sound that sends the entire boat shaking with fear, everyone grasping the side of the boat, looking at each other like, "We're going to die!” Grog turns around, steps forward, pushing Pike and Scanlan to the side a little bit, and just glares at this creature, gives a giant bestial goliath shout (roars) out into the cavern that counteracts the moan that it's doing. You can see the creature, teeth bared, its wings out, looking extremely frightening, looks visibly shaken. It begins to flap backwards and actually get about 30 feet of distance between you guys instinctually with its movement.

TRAVIS: That's right, bitch! He's frightened until the end of the next turn.

LAURA: Does that cancel out our fear?

MATT: It doesn't cancel out yours. It just means it's further away and can't get closer to Grog.

SAM: But we're still scared of it.

MATT: You're still scared of it until the end of its next turn, but now it's keeping its distance from the boat. It was starting to catch up to you guys, and now it's actually pulled back. Not wanting to get near Grog. All right. Tiberius.

ORION: What's the creature made out of? What's his skin like when I look at him?

MATT: It looks leathery. It has almost the texture of a very, very thick bat or lizard skin. But it's very dark, from what you can see. You've had just little glimpses of it here and there. Most of it's been shrouded in shadow. It's almost like a thick leather cloak that's come to life.

ORION: Well, I don't really– Hey! What do you think I should do, guys?

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: Knock it into the water. Let the shark have at it.

SAM: Can you make us faster? Can you haste her, or anything?

ORION: Haste doesn't work that way now.

LAURA: How high are the ceilings? Can you pillars it down into the water?

SAM: Just defer.

ORION: I'll defer for now.

MATT: Okay, so Tiberius, you move your movement to later.

LIAM: We can't sail away–

SAM: Can you shake us? Can you shake our magic fear?

MATT: Not unless you have an anti-fear spell. Scanlan, you're up.

SAM: I'm going to attack at disadvantage, I guess, with… I'm going to create a big hand right in front of him, to stall him with the Bigby's Hand.

ASHLEY: Talk to the hand!

MATT: All right!

TRAVIS: Bigby's Hand?

ORION: Bigby Hand? Nice!

SAM: It's this guy I know. His name's Bigby, he has a big hand.

MATT: All right, so. You take your turn. Are you just using the… which one?

SAM: I'm going to grapple and try to get it into the water

MATT: Oh, Grasping Hand?

ASHLEY: Ooh.

MATT: Okay, all right. Attempt to grapple. Use the hand's strength score to resolve the grapple.

SAM: What do I do? What do I roll?

MATT: Strength of 26, so roll d20 plus eight.

MARISHA: Come on!

SAM: I don't know what that is. Is that a six or a nine?

LAURA: There should be a dot on one side.

SAM: It's a nine!

MATT: Okay, so nine plus eight. You're at 17. Its contest was at 15. Oh, but you are at disadvantage. So roll again.

MARISHA: Oh, come on…

LAURA: Don't be lower.

SAM: 14. Yeah, I'm good.

MATT: Okay, so as you rear back, your eyes squinting, just scared to even do anything with this creature, you try out this new spell that you've only just recently managed to conjure to your attention.

SAM: (singing) Talk to the hand!

MATT: As Scanlan finishes singing, the rippling sonic energy from his singing shoots out from in front of him and forms this giant, slightly ethereal-looking arcane fist the size of the creature that reaches out, grabs onto it as he's moving his hand, controlling it silently from a distance. It grapples the creature, holds it in place as its wings are also folded on itself and you pull down. Let's see here. Grasping Hand. All right, so you are trying to…?

SAM: Well, I don't know. Does it fall from gravity, or does it just it stay there, locked in?

MATT: It's locked in where you're holding it.

SAM: Okay. Then I'll just lock it there.

MATT: Okay, so you lock it there. Great. You can use a bonus action to crush it.

SAM: Oh yeah, I can crush it. Yeah, I also give it a little squeeze. A little tickle.

MATT: So as you're holding it in place, you use your bonus action to squeeze it. It takes 2d6 plus five bludgeoning damage.

SAM: 11 plus five. 16.

MATT: 16, nice. As it is currently held in place, screeching (screech, crunch) you hear this strange crushing sound of bones breaking on the inside of its strange form.

SAM: This is the strongest I've ever been!

(all laugh)

MATT: All right, and it is considered grappled, which is bad for a creature like that. That ends Scanlan's turn. Vex.

LAURA: Hunter's Mark!

MATT: All right, you Hunter's Mark the creature.

LAURA: And I'm going to attack him twice! Because I'm original.

TRAVIS: I have one thing I do.

LAURA: 16.

MATT: 16 does hit.

LAURA: And 28.

MATT: All right. Technically, because it's grappled–

LIAM: Does it cancel out the disadvantage?

MATT: It does not, technically. It just means he can move it, so yeah, it does not cancel out the disadvantage.

LAURA: Oh, so I've got to roll a couple more times?

MATT: Yeah.

LAURA: They both hit. They're both high.

MATT: Okay, great. There you go. So, as you're on the boat, you can see the hand grasping. It gives you a moment of bravery. You pull out (swoosh, swoosh) let loose two more arrows into the slightly dark, shrouded exterior of the boat. Both arrows strike true into the currently-grappled cloak-like creature.

LAURA: 26 for those two. Plus Hunter's Mark. Oh, wait! No, 30 for those two. And nine for Hunter's Mark.

MATT: Nice. Portions of it are trying to squeeze free of this arcane hand. One strikes through its wing, leaving a gaping wound in the middle, where you can see it's going to have a hard time maintaining height at this point. The second one strikes it and actually pierces one of its red, glowing eyes. It gives out this horrible, painful screeching sound (screech) into the cavern as you can now see what was once two gleaming red, piercing eyes, left with only one, and darkness on the other side of its face.

TRAVIS: Yes! Yes!

ASHLEY: Ooh!

MATT: That brings us to Kima and Clarota. Kima, at this point in time is, unfortunately, at a disadvantage of finding out what to do at this distance, being a paladin. She is going to attempt–

TRAVIS: The middle finger.

MATT: Nothing. She's going to wait it out.

ORION: I see what happens.

MATT: So you're taking your turn after Laura?

ORION: Yes. I'll follow suit. I'm going to… I'm going to straight-up cast this because I have to. I cast Telekinesis and I pull the eye out. (sucking noise)

LAURA: Ew.

TRAVIS: Kill Bill-style, right?

MATT: Interesting! Okay. So Clarota, at this time, is also going to attempt a Mind Blast on the creature. It moves to the back of the boat and while it's currently grappled, he's going to attempt that. The saving throw does succeed, so it only takes half damage. Okay. Marking that. And then as you do Telekinesis. Roll a d20 plus five.

ORION: Okay. And do I have advantage because of the grapple?

MATT: The grapple does not give you advantage, no. So you have disadvantage on the roll, technically, because you are scared of it.

ORION: And that's my what?

MATT: Plus five.

ORION: 17.

MATT: 17? All right. So! As you focus your energy once again– even just facing this creature is a terrifying thing– you see that one gleaming bit of red that's piercing through the darkness. The secondary form around it dissipates. Where there was once two gliding, one of them vanishes entirely as that gleaming red is suddenly much brighter, yanked from its socket. It now gives out another painful screech (screeches) as it is blinded, being crushed by a Bigby Hand, and you now have drifting amongst you at your control one of the eyes of this creature.

(all laugh)

LAURA: Put it in a little vial. Keep it for later.

ORION: I'm going to float it over and put it in one of my vials.

MATT: Okay. Write down in your inventory, “cloaker eye.”

ORION: I'm going to smell it, first of all.

ORION: No.

LAURA: Not good.

TALIESIN: You know exactly where that's been.

MATT: This guy's not having a good day. Vax, you're up.

LIAM: All right. Dagger, dagger, thunk, thunk. But at disadvantage because of the dark. I'm not afraid.

MATT: Well, no. You resisted the fear. You have low light, so you're fine.

LIAM: Okay. First one is 26.

MATT: Hits.

LIAM: Second one is 26.

MATT: Hits. Because it is blinded, you do have advantage on it– not advantage; you are able to sneak attack.

LIAM: Sneak attack. All right, okay.

MATT: It's currently held aloft, grappled by the hand. It has no visual sight, currently.

SAM: I've no idea what we're even fighting.

LIAM: 23.

MATT: All right. How do you want to do this?

MARISHA: (cheers)

LIAM: I saw where Tiberius pulled the eye out, and that's what I'm aiming at, its eye socket. So I flip it in the air, and when I catch it, I immediately let go and fill in the blank.

MATT: Okay!

SAM: “Socket” to me.

MATT: So as the creature is flailing about in torturous pain, suddenly the dagger (fwoosh, thunk) sinks into the empty socket in the front of its face. As it does, its body tenses up and reaches out against the force of your arcane hand. You actually have to focus to keep it in place in its final death throes. All of its tension and then it falls limp within your grasp. You now have this limp creature at your disposal.

SAM: Oh, I'm going to bring him to the boat.

MATT: As Scanlan slowly drifts over the limp body of this creature to the edge of the boat–

LAURA: What was it? Can we loot him?

(all laugh)

LAURA: Does he have teeth and scales and neat things?

LIAM: It's a cloaker, because that was a cloaker's eye.

TALIESIN: Can we fashion it into a sail?

SAM: That's a good idea.

MATT: There is no wind in this tunnel.

MARISHA: I can make one.

SAM, TALIESIN, AND LAURA: We can make wind.

ASHLEY: We do have an Air Ashari.

LAURA: We have a Grog.

TRAVIS: Oh, we can make wind.

TALIESIN: Grog will make wind.

ORION: I rolled a 16 for a history check on the creature.

MATT: History's not going to do much for you. Nature is what you're going to want to do. Nature or arcana, those are the two.

ORION: So that's 14. Oh, no. Arcana?

MATT: Roll for arcana.

ORION: Yeah. 25.

MATT: Yep. This creature is a cloaker. It's an aberration. It's one of those creatures that drifts over from the Far Realm, or at some point in time drifted over from the Far Realm and is an unnatural entity to this plane. They normally live subterranean. When not moving, they are nearly invisible and blend in, almost like a straight leather cloak left and discarded to the side, hence the name “cloaker.”

TALIESIN: I've got a great idea. I want to sit, and I want to skin this thing.

ORION: Well, yes. I want the teeth, also.

TALIESIN: You can have the teeth. I'm going to skin it.

MATT: Okay. So you guys are now currently in this boat, drifting along in the open area over on that side.

LAURA: Should we make our way to the little island?

TALIESIN: Or we could go to those strange buildings that are off in the northwest corner.

LAURA: All the way up and over?

MARISHA: Oh, well, I was going to say we could go into this cave here.

SAM: Maybe move it this way so the people can see.

LAURA: Oh yeah, it's right on the edge.

TALIESIN: Keep going. There you go.

MARISHA: Well, what about this cave?

LAURA: The only thing is, I'm afraid that if we keep using up all our spells, then we won't be able to take down the big baddie if we come to him.

MARISHA: We need a rest.

LAURA AND ASHLEY: We need rest.

MARISHA: I want to be able to use my scrying spell before we try anything.

LAURA: Oh, okay. So should we make our way to this cave?

MARISHA: Sure.

TRAVIS: Good, we'll do that.

ORION: How close are we? How long will that take?

MATT: If you guys start heading that direction, you'll find out.

TALIESIN: Let's start heading that direction, and I want to skin this creature.

MATT: Okay, as you guys are moving along, you leave a little space for Percy. It's a little unwieldy in the ship. It's hard for you to do this, so it's not going to be the best job.

TALIESIN: Not going for craftsmanship.

MATT: Fair enough. As you're plucking what you think might be interesting from this creature's body, as in the process of skinning it, you probably take a moment to realize that a normal blade is going to have a hard time cutting through its hide, so you might have to borrow one.

SAM: I sing a little song to inspire him. I sing, “When you're trying to skin a cloaker, here's some inspiration. When we're on a creepy boat, here's some inspiration. I want you to be near me–” (speaking) All right, that's it.

(all laugh)

MATT: Right, so you gain a d10 inspiration dice.

TALIESIN: I'm making a camo canopy for the boat.

MATT: Yeah, this is going to be a survival check on this. Roll survival.

ORION: I rolled a natural 20 to help him with any arcana enchantment if he succeeds.

TALIESIN: 17.

MATT: 17? Did you add the inspiration dice to that?

TALIESIN: I didn't.

MATT: You don't have to if you don't want to.

TALIESIN: I'm keeping it for later.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: No, it only lasts ten minutes.

TALIESIN: Oh, does it only last ten minutes?

ORION: A lot can happen in ten minutes.

TALIESIN: Oh, in that case, 26.

MATT: 26 would make a difference. In the confined space on this ship, as you guys crest around towards the northern side of that island, you begin to move around. You can see to the right of you, there is this tunnel that filters out the side of this cavern that's just a continuation of the water, a river on the far end. You don't know where it goes. It disappears in the darkness, and you can hear in the distance the light sound of rushing water.

MARISHA: Can I use my shark eyes to look down the tunnel?

MATT: It begins to curve about 20 feet in, so you're unable to make much past that distance, and it looks like a continuation of the water flowing through, or into; you're not quite able to tell from this distance.

TALIESIN: (singing) Nobody knows what it's like–

TALIESIN AND MARISHA: (singing) To be a shark man.

MATT, ORION, AND SAM: (laugh)

MATT: Percy. You manage to pull from it all the teeth in the process.

TALIESIN: For you.

MATT: So that comes to roughly 45 cloaker teeth. You don't know what that'll be worth, but you have that at your disposal. So you can write down, “45 cloaker teeth.” You manage to skin most of it. You get most of the top of its hide usable. It's still wet. It'll take a while to do that, let alone in an area where it's dry on the surface. But you manage to pull most of the top of it off, so you have this wet, skinned portion of the back of the cloaker at your disposal.

TALIESIN: I'm going to build a relative canopy specifically for the left side of the boat so that we're protected and visibly obscured from anybody in the city.

MATT: Okay. Make a tinker check.

TALIESIN: What's the bonus on that, again?

MATT: Well, for that, it should be dex, I believe.

TALIESIN: Dex, thank you. (raspberry noise)

MATT: Plus four, because you're proficient with it. So it's your dex plus your proficiency modifier.

TALIESIN: That's 11.

MATT: 11?

TALIESIN: I rolled really badly.

MATT: Yeah, you did. You still have the hide. In the time it takes for you to get to the beach, you don't have much material at your disposal, and to fashion anything that's on that side, the most you manage to get is a slight lift to it, and by the time you get to the beach, it just collapses on itself.

TALIESIN: Okay. Once we're at the beach and we have all evening, I'll make another attempt.

MATT: Okay, it'll take you some time. It's doable, but it'll take a while.

TALIESIN: I had a two.

ASHLEY: It's okay.

TRAVIS: We made our way to the beach.

MATT: As you make your way towards the beach, Keyleth, you see in the distance in the water what looks like something slinking on the very bottom of this underground lake. Probably a good 50, 60 feet down, you can barely make out what looks like a dark form, probably about 100 to 150 feet away, and it's only because of your shark form that you're able to make out any sort of semblance of it, but it looks big, and it looks like it's slowly moving through the bottom of the lake. Doesn't seem to be moving towards you.

ORION: It's just a thing. There's going to be things here.

SAM: What if it's just like one of those party cruises where they–

TRAVIS: On the bottom of the–

TALIESIN: Submersive party cruise.

LAURA: How close are we to the cave? Are we still really far away?

MATT: You guys are maybe 300 feet from the beach.

SAM: But we don't see it because we're on deck, right?

MATT: The creature? No, only Keyleth does.

MARISHA: I drop them off at the beach.

TALIESIN: Let's dry-dock the boat.

MATT: Okay, I'm going to ask Keyleth to make a stealth check in shark form.

TALIESIN: A shark stealth. Stealth shark.

MATT: The dex bonus of a shark form is zero, so just roll a d20.

MARISHA: That's not true. It's plus one.

MATT: Giant shark? According to here… it says one. It's a zero. Dex is 11.

MARISHA: Oh, I was looking at mine.

SAM: Shark argument!

MARISHA: It's okay. 17.

MATT: 17, okay. As you deftly drag the boat at just the right distance to curve around this large subterranean form, it doesn't seem to take notice, and eventually drifts far enough away where you can no longer make any sort of visual connection with its form. You make your way to the side of the beach. You drag up to the point where the ship begins to hit the gravel. You begin to move, curve to the side, and it (grinding sound) lifts up and comes to a rest at the top of the gravel beach. You guys all step off the boat. Okay, Grog, you go ahead and haul the boat up.

LAURA: I'm going to cast Pass Without a Trace on all of us right now.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: I go ahead and un-shark myself.

MATT: Okay.

LIAM: And I'm going to look for bad things on the beach.

SAM: Yeah, what's the layout of the beach? Is it just a beach?

MATT: Okay, so looking at the beach here, it's an open beach. You can see there are a few rock formations, small 15-foot-tall portions of stalagmites or stone that either have been here for a long time or have been constructed or put there to jut out of that part of the beach. But for the most part, it's just an open gravel beach that slowly comes to stop at the edge of the cavern, and there is a tunnel about 15, 20 feet wide ahead of you.

SAM: Is there a half-submerged Statue of Liberty, or anything?

MATT: Perception check?

(all laugh)

SAM: I got a 16 for my perception.

MATT: 16. You do not see any sort of half-submerged Statue of Liberty. My apologies.

LIAM: How far away are we from the main island? Is it like DUMBO to Manhattan distance?

MATT: Yeah, I'd say it's probably about a good half a mile or so.

TRAVIS: I would like to perceive if Lady Kima has been giving me any second looks after I intimidated old Flappy Wings.

MATT: Make a perception check.

TRAVIS: Ten, plus… probably nothing. Yeah, nothing. Ten.

MATT: It's hard to tell. She seems very focused on the task at hand. Her eyes have been, for the most part, up in the air around you. Unfortunately, Grog, you don't think she's paying much mind to you at the moment because she's more concerned about keeping the group alive and where you guys are currently headed. You'll have to try harder to get her attentions. It's okay, Grog.

LAURA: Can we look around the entrance and see if anything dangerous looks like it's around? I'm looking up on the ceiling.

MATT: Yeah, now that you know the idea of what to look for, for a cloaker, go ahead and make a perception check.

LIAM: 29.

MATT: Okay. You guys glance around and, currently looking at the walls on the exterior of this beach area, nothing matches the description of what you saw in the previous cavern. For the time being, it looks relatively safe on this part of the beach.

LAURA: Okay.

LIAM: And there's caves?

MATT: There is a singular cave on the far end. There's a slight outcropping, and then it leads into that one 20-foot-wide cavern that goes deeper in there.

LIAM: I'm going to creep up just to the edge of the cave. I'm not going to go in. Is it a separate perception check for the inside of the cave as well?

MATT: Yes.

LIAM: All right.

MATT: You want to make a stealth check one more time? Stealth check first.

LIAM: Stealth check is good. It's a 21. 31.

MATT: 31, okay. So making your way up, you dodge from low on the side of the beach, jumping in front of these strange stone platforms, keeping in, look for cover. You make your way up against the side of a wall, begin to glance inside. Make a perception check.

LIAM: And that is 19.

MATT: 19. It's pitch-black in the cavern. You have no light source, unfortunately. You have darkvision, which does help you to a certain extent. You cannot see the entirety of the cavern, but you can see about, let's say, 40 to 60 feet in. The beach gravel comes to a halt and comes to this smooth stone flooring. You don't see anything that particularly catches your attention.

LIAM: Manufactured or made, or just paved floor?

MATT: It looks like it has some natural change in the topography. It's not a polished floor, but it's definitely been worn over time.

LAURA: Can we maybe try to look in?

ORION: Could be a tide cave.

TRAVIS: We have firewood bundles and stuff.

MARISHA: I'm wet. That was a really cold lake.

ORION: Prestidigitation! Now you're all dry.

LIAM: It's very hard to know, though. It's dark in there.

LAURA: Should we just light it up, see what's in there?

TALIESIN: Let's light it up. See what happens.

LAURA: Hey, Tiberius?

ORION: Yes? Oh, Light!

LAURA: I shoot the arrow.

MATT: Okay. So as you cast Light on the arrow, it's blinding. You know at this point to close that one eye as you release it in the distance.

LAURA: Oh wait, wrong eye.

MATT: There you go. That's the one.

LAURA: Right, right.

MATT: You fire the arrow into the depth of this cavern. Before the Light spell wears off, it arcs inward and it hits the back wall and ricochets off. Looking inside, it all looks like a natural cavern interior. The light is the same glowing white light that you're used to. Once it enters the deep part of the cave, the light almost gets a purplish hue before it's snuffed out.

LAURA: This doesn't seem very good.

ASHLEY: Wait, the light gets a purplish hue?

MATT: The white light becomes purple and then (ffft) is snuffed.

ORION: I want to do an arcana check. 18. Check for any nasty magic.

MATT: At this distance, it's hard to make out any sort of source. You don't sense anything directly, at your distance. You'd probably have to get deeper in the cave to make a true assessment of the magical source.

LAURA: Oh, you didn't add ten to your stealth. Pass Without a Trace.

MATT: You have Pass Without a Trace now, too?

LAURA: Well, I already– yeah.

LIAM: So my stealth was at a 41.

MATT: Okay. Good to know. (laughs)

SAM: What do we do? We've got to get– someone's going in.

TRAVIS: Want me to go in?

SAM: Yeah, man! Go in!

OTHERS: No!

LIAM: No, if anyone's going in, send me. I'm at a 41 stealth, and if we stay on the beach, we're in view of the main island.

LAURA: We've got to try to hide a little bit.

ASHLEY: So the arrow's not still lit? It just went through? Can you Light, Tiberius?

LAURA: Just get some light in there. Can you put Daylight in there?

LIAM: Tiberius, my dagger. Do the dagger.

ORION: Well, sure, but it means that thing will be bright the whole time.

LIAM: I would lose stealth.

ORION: Yes, you would.

MARISHA: Pike, can you check–

ASHLEY: I have darkvision.

MATT: Yes, as do a lot of you guys.

ASHLEY: Oh, we all do.

LAURA: Can you see if it's evil?

SAM: Light a fire. Let's just light a fire and throw it in there.

LIAM: Non-magical.

TRAVIS: We have torches.

LIAM: Yeah, throw a torch in.

SAM: Yeah, let's just toss a torch.

TRAVIS: I pull one of the three torches we have and, “Tiberius, will you?”

ORION: (fire breath noise)

TRAVIS: I give it a nice long throw.

MATT: All right. Tiberius's flame breath (fsssh) coalesces and begins to ignite the tip of the torch as Grog lobs it in, end over end. You see it hits the far end of the cavern, topples, and hits the ground. The fire itself, the bright red burning, as it comes to rest, takes on once again a strange purplish hue.

LIAM: Do the half-elves and the gnomes see anything when there's light going through?

MATT: You see nothing in particular. You catch what looks almost like small whiffs of almost a mist or a fog, but it's like, (ffft) then vanish, (shh).

LAURA: I don't think we should go in there.

MATT: Almost like there's this perpetually materializing and dematerializing tufts of small clouds of smoke.

LIAM: Forget this. Forget this cave. Keyleth, can you do that thing you do where you make the beach look like an empty beach, or something other than it is? Can we camp on the beach instead of going in there?

MARISHA: I can.

ORION: Let's do that. I agree. I'm tired.

MARISHA: What if this is a clue or something important?

SAM: Yeah, we've never shied away from a confrontation before.

ORION: Pike, can you sense if there's any nasties down there?

ASHLEY: Can I use Dispel Magic?

MATT: You can attempt to, yeah.

ASHLEY: Okay, I'll attempt.

MATT: Okay. So Pike, as you step up to the mouth of the cave, looking where the torchlight is, you cast Dispel Magic. As you formulate your divine energy, grasping onto your symbol of Sarenrae around your neck, you can see this strange pulsing shimmer of divine energy that clears out the area. The purplish hue to the light vanishes and the light becomes a natural torchlight for a moment and all the wisps of smoke vanish… then slowly filter back into the space.

TRAVIS: We don't need to go in there.

SAM: Indeed. If only we had someone who could go under the ground and be one with the earth and pop up in there and look around– no?

LAURA: But she'll be popping up into the wisps.

SAM: Yeah, but she'll be fine!

TRAVIS: Wall it up!

LAURA: I think just wall it up. Can we see anything sparkling? Can we look in and see if there's anything that looks useful?

TRAVIS: Yeah, do I see any shapes and colors and sparkly things?

ASHLEY: Should we check for traps?

MATT: It's hard to tell. You can't see the entire cavern from this distance, because the cavern opens up and then curves around. There's a whole portion you can't see without entering it.

LIAM: Here's what I think, all right? We don't need to whack every problem over the head, and we have something far more important than whatever's in there.

LAURA: Right, Lady Kima?

ORION: Right. I suggest we go and rest. I believe we can get some respite.

MATT: “I think we have a specific goal at this point in time, and who knows what dangers or terrors roam these tunnels aside from our specific directional choice at this moment.”

LIAM: The only question is, do we want to try to rest here under some sort of illusion, or do we go to the island we can see?

LAURA: No, because the island's way over back here.

TALIESIN: We rest here. We take shifts. We should be fine.

LIAM: We could sail there to the northwestern edge of the island. There's some sort of structure there.

LAURA: I think we rest up before we do that.

MARISHA: What if there's something in this cavern that could help us, though?

LAURA: Can you wall it up?

TRAVIS: Between you and Tiberius, with the columns and stuff?

MARISHA: We could. How about this?

TRAVIS: I don't need to rest, so I can just stand guard.

MARISHA: How about I do what Scanlan says?

SAM: Oh. Hello.

TALIESIN: That always works.

MARISHA: Yes, I know. I think this is the first time I've said this, ever. Maybe I'll try what Scanlan says and I'll turn into a rock elemental and just bamf in there and see if there's anything good, and if it's bad, I'll just run out and make a rock wall.

SAM: Oh. Okay.

LAURA: All right. We'll all be ready to attack on the outside.

MARISHA: Maybe? Okay?

TRAVIS: Go for it.

TALIESIN: Yeah, let's go for it. This is a terrible plan. I think it's a great idea.

MARISHA: Let's do it. I like it.

SAM: Yeah, let's send in one person.

ORION: As soon as I see Her Royalty go in–

MATT: All right. You all gather yourself on the exterior of the cave. You get into defensive positions and prepare–

LIAM: Can I ask one quick question before we go? Regardless of what happens, if there is something shitty in here or not, are we camping here afterward?

OTHERS: Yes.

LIAM: We're sure? Okay. Then I click my Boots of Haste.

MATT: All right.

MARISHA: I'm going to go ahead and cast Enhance Ability on myself before I do that, and give myself… extra wisdom.

MATT: All right, extra wisdom.

MARISHA: I want to be a perceptive bastard while I'm in there.

MATT: So Keyleth transforms herself into her earth elemental form.

TALIESIN: Rah. That's what rocks say.

TALIESIN AND MARISHA: Rah.

SAM: I'm going to inspire her with a little dolphin dance or something. Whatever that is. I don't know, I'm just going to–

MATT: It's hard to explain why, but his strange shimmy is slightly inspiring. You've learned something about yourself today that you hope nobody else wants to bring up in conversation. You get a d10 inspiration dice.

ORION: As soon as I see Keyleth go off, I rub my ring and go invisible.

MATT: Okay. So as you guys all mount into your defensive positions, Keyleth, are you going straight through? Are you going beneath, above?

MARISHA: Burrow beneath. I'll go, “(deep voice) Bye-bye.”

MATT: This large earth elemental form takes a few lumbering steps forward, and begins to sink into the sand and gravel below, just (shifting sound).

MARISHA: “Oh yeah, wait, have you guys seen this one?”

(all laugh)

MARISHA: As I go into the ground.

MATT: The most awkward earth elemental exit ever.

MARISHA: “I'll take the elevator.”

TRAVIS: I think it's the funniest thing I've ever seen.

(all laugh)

MATT: Grog's loud laughter bellows, echoing through the cavern. You make your way underneath the ground, using your tremor sense to formulate where the top of this cavern would be, and you poke your head through the floor. Looking into this, you can see now, there are portions of this cavern where it looks like elements of the mithril veins that the subterranean Kraghammer mines were currently pulling from seem to now spread down into this cavern. There are small veins that trickle through the rock in this cavern of mithril. You also look up and… make a perception check.

MARISHA: With advantage, right?

MATT: This is wisdom, yep.

MARISHA: That's a 13. That's a 19! I'll take that one.

MATT: All right, total of?

MARISHA: 29.

MATT: 29. You take a moment and formulate your vision, the firelight still trickling through, although you have darkvision. You look about the room, and you can see there is a strange energy about the room. There's something about this room that feels similar to when you encountered the Frost Plane during the first Westruun winter's veil encounter. There's a type of energy that seems to be brought into being whenever you've caught a mind flayer shifting and bamfing out of any sort of combat you come into. There's something about this room that seems like it's crossing over or has a thin barrier with some other plane.

LIAM: It's a gate.

MATT: You don't see a particular doorway, but it feels like there is a very thin veil here, and as you focus more on the vicinity, you can see what looks like little bits of energy that leak through. That mist you were seeing seems to be elements where the actual reality of this room is warping temporarily, and shifting.

ASHLEY: It's like Stargate.

MARISHA: Can I take a piece of rock and toss it up?

MATT: You take it and you throw it up. It arcs across, hits the other side of the room, and clatters to the ground. As it clatters to the ground, you suddenly see, lightning-quick, five of these large, fast-moving, slithering weird creatures that were up against the wall and now visible at this point strike at the rock and seem to start fighting each other for whatever that movement was. They're large, bluish and purple in color when it shifts in its form, with these sharp beaks and what looks like four tentacles that wrap out from the face.

LIAM: That's familiar.

SAM: Maybe they're friendly!

MATT: Make a nature check, if you want. No, this would be arcana. Arcana. This wouldn't be nature.

MARISHA: Arcana? All right.

TALIESIN: You've got a number there.

MARISHA: I've got a vague number. 11.

MATT: Okay.

MARISHA: Wait! Plus four. 15.

MATT: Arcana is intellect, though. It's not wisdom, is it?

MARISHA: I used Scanlan's die.

MATT: Oh, you did? Oh, I see. 15. Unable to really make out more than you've heard of creatures like this. Unlike most aberrations and creatures that seem to bleed over from different planes of existence, this one is not an aberration in its form. This is just a subterranean monstrosity. It's known as a grick.

MARISHA: A grick.

MATT: Essentially, it looks like that.

ALL: Ew!

SAM: Show the people at home.

TRAVIS: I automatically don't like it.

MATT: As they all take a moment and realize that whatever they were fighting over is not living and not moving, they hiss at each other and slowly find other alcoves and what you can now see are small caves that are dug into the rock nearby. Something draws them to this room, as any natural space with this strange, fluctuating energy would do so.

MARISHA: But they're not necessarily bleeding through from the other plane. They come from this plane.

MATT: It seems to be, yeah. They're not too weird. They're weird, but they're not too weird.

MARISHA: Big worms with tentacles, but not too weird.

MATT: You've seen it all.

TALIESIN: They're not wearing sombreros or anything.

LAURA: So what are you doing, Keyleth? Are you staying in there?

TRAVIS: Please say no.

MARISHA: I'm just going to seep back down.

LIAM: Take the stairs, though.

MARISHA: I take the stairs.

MATT: All right. After a few moments, Keyleth reappears.

MARISHA: But before I reappear, I go, “Grog. I'm in a boat.”

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: She's in the floor! And she's in a boat! It's magic. (giggles)

LIAM: It is pretty funny.

TRAVIS: Will you teach me that sometime?

MARISHA: “No.”

MATT: For a split-second, as you're doing that, you realize that laughter's probably very audible.

MARISHA: I'm not an elemental anymore.

MATT: So as you start laughing, you revert back from elemental form.

MARISHA: I go, “Tee-hee-hee, shh.”

ASHLEY: Make a wall!

LAURA: Wait, what did you see, Keyleth?

SAM: Wait, is she back?

MATT: Yeah, her elemental form is gone. She's now back into Keyleth's form.

LIAM: We're all just on the beach.

ORION: I'm not.

SAM: Thanks, Ti.

LIAM: People were still laughing.

ASHLEY: I'm laughing just a little bit. I maybe peed a little.

ORION: Pike is chuckling, at best.

TRAVIS: I stop laughing.

LAURA: What was it? Was there anything in there?

MARISHA: It seemed like it had Dimension Door properties, but I don't know if it was necessarily at full Dimension Door strength.

LAURA: Were there creatures?

MARISHA: There were creatures. There appeared to be these things that I've heard of, called gricks. They're like worms with beaks and tentacles.

LAURA: Oh, I've heard of gricks. They're really fast.

MARISHA: Yeah, they're super-fast.

LAURA: Yeah, they slither.

LAURA: Yeah, man. I studied the Underdark.

LIAM: All right.

MARISHA: They did this whole Hungry Hungry Hippos thing.

SAM: But you said it was a gate to another dimension?

MARISHA: It seemed to be some sort of dimensional gateway. I don't know which dimension.

SAM: I we come across any people that we can beat information out of, we might want to ask them if this a known thing, a gateway back to the overworld.

LAURA: I think it would probably go to the Abyss or something.

LIAM: Or a shortcut into the–

MARISHA: Into the temple.

LAURA: I wonder, do they attack things? They seemed really fast, right?

MARISHA: The grick things? Yeah.

LAURA: Percy can you make a bomb?

SAM: Oh, he did already. I've got it. I have a bomb.

LAURA: Can you throw the bomb in there and they would all maybe attack it, and maybe it would blow them up?

SAM: Maybe. It might hit some of them. Do we want to go in there? Because we can certainly do that.

LAURA: Just throw it from outside and see what happens.

MARISHA: If we take a few minutes and I take another breather– because being a rock elemental takes it out of you for a little bit– and you guys can make some bombs, I can go back in there as an elemental.

ORION: Actually, I think that's a good idea. Percy? The bomb that Scanlan is holding, could you fix a thing around it to possibly hold magic properties?

TALIESIN: I have not the slightest clue how to do that.

ORION: You can use some of this– one of the glass, my potion– what do you call those fucking things?

TRAVIS: Vials?

ORION: Yes.

SAM: Are we right outside the mouth of the cave right now?

LAURA: We are really close to it.

SAM: Can we get away from the mouth of the cave?

TRAVIS: Okay, who needs to rest? Show of hands, who needs rest?

MARISHA: I'm going to rest while they talk. While they figure out a plan.

LIAM: Tibber-hoods, do you have any fireballs left in you?

SAM: T-Money, what do you think?

ORION: I cast Silence on Vax.

(all laugh)

SAM: I cast Dispel Magic.

ORION: Counterspell!

SAM: Counter-counterspell!

ORION: Do you have Counterspell? You don't have Counterspell.

SAM: No.

(all laugh)

MATT: All right, both you guys go ahead– well no, roll your Counterspell roll.

ORION: Counterspell just fizzles his shit.

MATT: What level is your spell?

SAM: It's a level three spell?

MATT: So, no, your spell just (pfft).

SAM: Damn it.

ORION: And I don't silence him. Did I have to roll anything to do that?

MATT: No.

ORION: Oh, cool.

MATT: He has to make a save for Silence.

LIAM: Am I silenced?

MATT: What's the save on that one?

ORION: 17.

MATT: Right, but what's the actual save? Is it wisdom, is it intelligence?

LIAM: Well, I rolled pitifully, so it probably doesn't matter.

ORION: I just know it's 120-foot range. Should write the other stuff down.

LAURA: Tiberius, was that really necessary?

ORION: “No, it wasn't. But yes, I do have fireballs left.” And I dispel it immediately.

LIAM: (yells incoherently)

LAURA: Shh!

LIAM: I didn't know he was going to dispel it!

ORION: I'm unpredictable.

ASHLEY: Because I have Spiritual Weapon, maybe I can try to create a crazy-ass bomb type of thing.

SAM: We have a bomb.

MATT: You do know that the essence of Spiritual Weapon, it creates a weapon that is partially in form with your deity's weapon of choice or preference. It's mainly melee weapons. Nothing too intricate.

TALIESIN: We are not making a holy hand grenade.

LAURA: We already have a bomb. Just throw it in, they attack it, we close them up.

SAM: I have a bomb.

TRAVIS: We've got a bomb.

ORION: With what Vex is getting to, Percy, is if you could fashion such a thing, or if I could, I'll enchant it.

LAURA: Throw a bomb, they attack it, then you can throw a fireball at the same time. We just have to get them in a cluster.

ORION: Can I attempt to imbue the bomb with a fireball in it?

MATT: No, that is a Delayed-Blast Fireball, which is a higher-level spell.

ORION: Okay.

ASHLEY: Throw the bomb in.

LAURA AND LIAM: One-two punch.

TRAVIS: Scanlan, toss it.

SAM: I'm not a good thrower. Is that what you call it, thrower?

MARISHA: Here, give it to me and I'll go in as an elemental.

LIAM: No, we can just throw it.

LAURA: Just throw it!

SAM: Then you'll have to hit it to light it.

ASHLEY: Who has really good dexterity?

ORION: You have a bomb?

SAM: I have a bomb.

ORION: Hold it out in your hand, please.

SAM: I don't want to touch it. It's a saddlebag bomb.

LIAM: I'm not trying to get it into a basket.

LAURA: We just need to throw it into the cave.

ORION: I cast Telekinesis. I pick up the bomb, and I start guiding it into the cave.

LAURA: Is it so hard to just throw a freaking bomb into a cave?

SAM: It's already in!

ORION: Pay attention, ranger.

MATT: So the bomb that was constructed ages ago by Percy that was originally intended to put on a summoned pony.

SAM: Yes. Never got to use it.

MATT: But now is finally being used. Tiberius, you approach the edge of the cavern. Make a stealth check.

ASHLEY: How do we light it?

SAM: He'll light it. A what check?

LAURA: A stealth check.

ORION: I'm still invisible.

MATT: Right, so you would have advantage on that.

ORION: Oh. Dope.

LAURA: And you have Pass Without a Trace.

ORION: Yes. What's with that, so.

MATT: Invisibility and Telekinesis are both concentration spells. You would lose your Invisibility to cast Telekinesis.

ORION: All right. Well, I rolled 21.

MATT: A 21 total? On the first roll.

ORION: Yes. I rolled a 13 the second time.

MATT: Okay, got you. So as you make your way up to the edge of the cavern, you come in partially, you guide the bomb towards the back, and you lob it towards the far end. This large, awkward saddlebag-style construct of Percy's design, made of leather, metal bands, hits the back wall–

TALIESIN: I was very proud of that.

ORION: As soon as I let go, I cast Invisibility on myself again.

MATT: Okay.

ORION: I'm going to wait. What happens?

TRAVIS: Yeah, you wait and see what happens.

SAM: Let's find out.

MATT: Okay. The bomb hits the wall, hits the ground, tumbles for a second, awkwardly slumps over on itself. At which point, in a blur of motion, the strange hissing sound, a bunch of momentum hits the room and you see all these creatures begin attacking it–

ORION: As soon as I hear that noise, Fireball.

LAURA: What's the point of the bomb? Why not just do that?

LIAM: It'll ignite the bomb.

LAURA: You're right, it will, yeah.

MATT: So. The fireball impacts the far end of the wall, where the cluster of these strange worm creatures are. It explodes with a large, blasting, echoing explosion sound.

SAM: I'm doing this.

MATT: Hold your ears. Roll damage on that.

ASHLEY: I take my shield and put it in front of a couple people.

TALIESIN: Scanlan, is there any way you could absorb this sound?

MARISHA: Yeah, could we cast Silence?

SAM: Nope. He can't. Too late. He's casting like seven spells right now.

MATT: All right. How much damage is that?

LIAM: Once we finish this math, this explosion is going to be really cool.

LAURA: And really loud.

ORION: 32.

MATT: 32 points of damage?

ORION: Yeah.

MATT: That blasts open. Percy, roll 4d6 points of damage from the actual bomb as the fireball detonates the saddlebag simultaneously with the explosion of the fireball.

TALIESIN: 14 points of damage. 4d6.

MATT: Okay, all right, great. So simultaneously you guys hear (explosion noises). You can feel the sand shift and move and some part of the beach, some of the gravel moves and rocks a little bit.

TALIESIN: Oh, god.

MATT: Pitch-black smoke comes pouring out of the cavern. You have to guard yourself.

LIAM: That's going to attract some attention.

MATT: As the smoke slowly clears, you get a glance in there and you can see there are bits and pieces and chunks of grick matter across the wall and the inside of the cavern, with some gaping half-bodies of these creatures torn open from the explosion. There is nothing living and nothing moving from what you can see at the center of this cavern.

SAM: Let's go in!

MATT: The occasional (dripping sounds) chunks dripping off the ceiling.

TRAVIS: Excellent.

ASHLEY: Is the magic dispelled? For sure?

LAURA: Take a couple steps in, and perception.

MATT: Perception check.

LIAM: 15.

SAM: It was a good bomb.

TALIESIN: It was a very good bomb.

SAM: Thank you for crafting it for me. What do I owe you?

TALIESIN: Your life, at this point. And a song. You owe me a song.

SAM: Maybe start on a new one.

LAURA: 24.

MATT: Okay, glancing through? You can see the small tunnels that these creatures house themselves in as a defensive position. These creatures are not hunters, they're more scavengers, but they fight in packs and wait for things to find their way in. This tunnel was definitely a place where they do that to keep fed. However, this tunnel appears to be empty other than the strange phenomenon of this energy in the tunnel.

ORION: I feel we should camp here for the night.

ASHLEY: No more magic?

ORION: Or day, whenever the heck.

LAURA: Is there anything that can come through the portal?

TALIESIN: It's more just an energy shield.

SAM: Before we plan something, is there a portal or something?

MATT: Make an arcana check.

LIAM: Something funky in here.

ORION: Yes, of course, that's obvious.

LAURA: What's all this purple stuff?

LIAM: Well, let's figure it out.

SAM: 16.

MATT: 16. As you take a moment and step inside and feel the essence of it, there is no portal, there is no doorway, there is no tear. There's just a very thin veil between this plane and another. You're unable to really ascertain the nature of this energy coming through, but you're able to see there is these strange warps in reality. As you walk into this room, you look at your hands, and for a second your fingers seem to bend and go to form. As you look at people's faces, they twist and shift and then go back.

SAM: I don't think we should camp here.

MATT: You don't know if it's purely a visual thing or if matter itself is actually twisting, but it's very discombobulating being in this room for any length of time.

LIAM: Clarota, what are we looking at in here?

MATT: Clarota, as he enters behind you guys, puts his hands together and goes, “This, I believe, is the veil where K'Varn stepped into the cavern.”

ORION: Yes, exactly. That's what I was going to say earlier.

LAURA: Okay, Tiberius.

ORION: Me, Clarota, mm. That's what I do with Clarota.

MATT: The tentacles writhe around Clarota's maw.

ORION: That means he likes me.

MATT: “This is a boundary, a thin membrane between this Prime Material Plane and elements of the Far Realm.”

MARISHA: The Far Realm?

ORION: Ooh, Clarota. Yes. Do you think we could, after a rest of course, conjure a way and possibly break the barrier and go to that side?

MATT: “You wish not to do that. Your mind would break.”

ORION: Oh, that would be awful. I need it.

SAM: Clarota, is this a possible thing that we should maybe shut down? Could K'Varn send his allies through here?

MATT: “We have not the power to shut this down. It is how they overlap.”

LAURA: Is it safe to be near it?

MATT: “I don't know.”

(all laugh)

LAURA: I got him, guys, I got him.

MATT: “We'll have to find out.”

ORION: Well, at least we know this beach is secure. We should go out in the front and seal this up for the night.

LAURA: You were rather loud. I'm afraid things might be drawn to this beach from that explosion.

ASHLEY: We could keep watch.

TRAVIS: I don't need to rest. I'll stand guard.

ORION: This is inside and I was outside. They were hearing stuff inside.

TALIESIN: Could this veil exist in sunlight?

MATT: “I do not know. I have not traveled the boundary myself.”

LIAM: I wonder what would happen if K'Varn was cut off from the other side of this.

TALIESIN: That's exactly what I was thinking.

LAURA: Maybe it would be good to block it off.

LIAM: Or collapse it.

TALIESIN: At least wall it off on our way out.

SAM: Yeah, that's a good idea.

LAURA: I like it.

TRAVIS: Do that, you two.

MARISHA: Like, completely cave it in?

TRAVIS: Yeah, just block it off.

TALIESIN: Just wall it off. Earth-meld it.

MARISHA: I don't think throwing up a stone wall is going to necessarily stop K'Varn.

LAURA: No, but can't you use your rock-changing ability and squish all the rocks down and close the cave off?

TALIESIN: I was just having this conversation.

MARISHA: I can spend time essentially collapsing the whole thing.

LAURA: Yeah.

TRAVIS: I start kicking sand and gravel into the cave.

ORION: Wait, how wide is the slimmest part of the cave?

MATT: It's about 20, 25 feet.

LAURA: Keep going, Grog. You'll get there.

LIAM: We can camp, but it's only been six or seven hours since we woke up, really.

MARISHA: It's been longer. It was six or seven hours when we were on that side of the thing.

TALIESIN: We did take about eight hours or so.

LIAM: Eight hours, all right.

ASHLEY: Some of us can stay up. I can stay up, keep watch.

TRAVIS: Me, too.

MARISHA: There's still things I want to do.

LIAM: Spill it, girl, spill it.

MARISHA: Clarota?

MATT: “Yes?” His tentacles quiver as you call his name and he looks over at you with a curious, hungry-to-be-of-service expression on his tentacled, mind flayer face.

MARISHA: Do you have anything that might assist me in a scrying spell to help spy on K'Varn? Maybe something in his image?

MATT: “I have not seen K'Varn with my mind or my eyes. I've only heard of him arriving after I was cast out of my colony.”

TALIESIN: The description of her dream.

ASHLEY: Wait, but I had a vision. I had a dream.

LAURA: So you know what he looks like?

MARISHA: Do you know what he looks like?

ASHLEY: Well, what I saw was like a–

LAURA: Are those Cheez-Its you're eating right there?

ASHLEY: It's what I do when I'm thinking. I had a little snack pouch.

TALIESIN: Crackers, all around.

LIAM: It's lembas bread.

ASHLEY: I saw a single, twisted, unnatural black horn of–

MATT: Which Kima mentions again. “That. That is what we're trying to prevent making its way to the surface.”

ORION: I see.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: “That's the Horn of Orcus.”

LAURA: Maybe you can envision the horn?

ASHLEY: Would that work?

MATT: “I don't know. I'm not a scrying type.”

ORION: If you'll excuse me. I reach into my pouch and pull up the Scroll of Telescription. I enchant it to reach my brother Jerahd. I write on it, “Dear brother, it seems I am in a bit of a pickle with a certain type of creature that can take control of others with its mind and do nasty things. Goes by the name of K'Varn, and the only thing I know about him is that he has a black horn. Please help. Love, Tiberius.”

SAM: I put a little cologne on the page.

ORION: He can't smell it, Scanlan.

SAM: Yeah, but it's always a nice gesture.

ORION: And I send it.

MATT: Okay, so the scribe rolls itself on top and poof, vanishes in front of you.

ORION: Hopefully, he answers back promptly. Jerahd is a warlock and is a wizard of the mind, arcana, things I do not know of. He could possibly help us and has access to great knowledge in this matter.

SAM: Phone a friend.

ASHLEY: Good resource.

LAURA: I like it.

MARISHA: Well, I guess while we wait for him to respond, I'm going to start using all of my Stone Shape and I'm going to start vringing down this tunnel.

TALIESIN: I'm going to work on the boat.

MARISHA: Just start collapsing it.

MATT: Okay.

TRAVIS: Still kicking sand in.

LAURA: While she's doing that, can I use my primeval awareness and see if there's anything undead or aberrations or things that are around us that are seeming more active?

MATT: Okay, you have a long distance you can pull on that one. You take a moment and concentrate. Not in your immediate vicinity. You do sense that across the way, on that island, there are hundreds of aberrations.

TRAVIS: Hundreds?

TALIESIN: That's two zeros.

MATT: Hundreds. You can't make out the details, you just sense the presence. You see clusters, you see some wandering the outskirts of the island, and the center of the island, you sense there is one very strong source of aberration-based essence.

MARISHA: On the outskirts of the island?

MATT: No, in the center.

LAURA: In the center.

TRAVIS: In the temple.

LAURA: So. Wait. I'm sensing… would that help you to know that K'Varn is an aberration?

MARISHA: I'd assume anything helps.

LAURA: I'm sensing a really strong energy of an aberration in the middle of town.

MARISHA: Aberration in the center?

LAURA: And that's something that would've come out of this portal. Right, Clarota?

MATT: Clarota gives you a look and says, “Most likely, or at least is related to the kin from the other side of the veil.”

MARISHA: Wait, what?

SAM: “Or at least is related to the kin from the other side of the veil.”

MATT: “That.”

SAM: I speak Clarota.

MARISHA: Thank you.

MATT: “Pay attention, druid.”

MARISHA: I was taking notes!

TALIESIN: He said, “pay attention, druid.”

SAM: While this is going on, I go near Lady Kima and I start humming. I'm going to cast Suggestion on her.

MATT: Okay.

SAM: Or try to. I'm just going to say, “(singing) Gnome makes you want to check out Grog's bod, gnome makes you want to check out his bod and sweat him so hard.”

ORION: Is that B-52s?

SAM: Yeah.

TRAVIS: I go over to the water and scoop some and pour it over my head.

(all laugh)

MATT: As you're doing this, Grog, Kima, who at this point as you got out of this conversation is currently rewrapping the handle of the maul that she found earlier in the cavern, stops what she's doing, glances over at Scanlan with a very stern look and goes, “Gnome, I mean no disrespect when I say, toy with my mind again and you'll find the business end of this hammer right up your rectum.”

ALL: Oh!

SAM: And that's the part I need for shitting on beds, so I apologize. I apologize. I'm sorry.

MATT: “You've bothered me enough recently with your antics.” As she does that, she motions towards your nether region. “I'd watch it.”

SAM: I do call it my antic, but yes. You're right. I'm sorry, that was disrespectful. I apologize. I tried, man, come on. I'm your wingman.

MATT: She keeps wrapping the handle of the maul.

LIAM: Scanlan, she didn't say ant-dick, she said antic.

SAM: Thank you, Vax.

TRAVIS: Did it work?

SAM: I don't think so, Grog.

MATT: As we're taking a rest at this moment to prepare for whatever you guys want to do next. Let's take a quick restroom break for the group.

TALIESIN: Oh my god.

LAURA: Yeah, yes, please.

MATT: Let's say about a five-minute break if we want to just play three videos or so. We'll make it quick so we can get back to the game.
Break

ZAC: Hold up, before you go off–

MATT: Before we do that, all right, just a second.

LAURA: There's things happening.

MATT: Things are happening.

ZAC: I have a present from the chat room.

ALL: Whoa!

ZAC: It is a happy 10th episode Critical Role cake.

ALL: Aww!

MATT: You guys are so awesome!

LAURA: That's so sweet!

ZAC: Also, in honor of the twins.

MATT: All right, so they came in from this side.

SAM: Wow.

LAURA: Aw, you guys!

SAM: We get one of those every two episodes!

(all laugh)

SAM: Wow, that's great!

MATT: Guys, that's great. Thank you so much!

TALIESIN: This aberration is a cake!

ZAC: So while you guys are on break, you'll get yourselves some cake. But before we cut to the videos, I just want to remind everyone watching from the front page that we are 140 shirts away from getting to a thousand shirts sold, and at a thousand, we will do a live Q&A after the show tonight.

MATT: Yep.

ZAC: So we have an hour to sell 140 shirts.

SAM: Or sweatshirts.

ZAC: Or sweatshirts. There's hoodies on there. Women's cut tees.

LAURA: I still haven't ordered mine. I need to get my hoodie.

ZAC: Male tees.

MATT: Presents for your friends?

TRAVIS: Presents for your friends!

ORION: Yeah, that's cool.

TRAVIS: That's a good gift.

ZAC: All you've got to do is scroll down on the channel or join the chat room, or you'll see every once in a while the ads show up on the front page.

ORION: I'm going to really enjoy it.

ZAC: So get a t-shirt. We're pretty close. I think we're only 40 subs away or something, Lucas?

TALIESIN: Whoa.

ZAC: From a tabletop promo giveaway, and we'll have all these guys sign a poster and include that with shipping. If you're wondering why you should sub this channel, it helps keep shows like this, and we have a lot of other programming like a live comic book show, cosplay show. We have live music every Friday night. It's a good time. So you should sub. And I guess let's cut to the break.

TRAVIS: I've got to pee!

MATT: Five-minute break guys, make it quick. We'll see you back here in five minutes. Thank you.

[dramatic music] [character intros]
Part II

MATT: Welcome back. Break is finished. Once again, I want to remind you guys, we're just a little over 100 shirts left. If we can manage to get to 1,000 in the next 45 minutes–

SAM: It's going to be tight.

LAURA: It's going to be tight.

TRAVIS: Gifts. Gifts for your friends and family. Your pets.

MATT: Shop for your buddies' birthdays–

LIAM: Your friends are going to be watching the show in under a month.

SAM: You know what? Just buy them and then return them after the show's over.

(all laugh)

SAM: It's fine.

ORION: Just do that.

SAM: We'll take it.

MATT: Don't do that.

LAURA: Don't do that.

MATT: Yeah, no worries, guys. So to bring this back to where we were, you guys have been puttering around after you're clearing out this cavern on the northern shore of this large cave surrounding Yug'Voril. What is your current plan of action?

TRAVIS: While they've been sleeping, I took my axe–

SAM: Wait, did we sleep?

MATT: You guys didn't end up resting, I think.

TRAVIS: Oh, no?

MATT: Just been preparing.

TRAVIS: I thought we rested.

LAURA: No, we haven't rested.

MARISHA: I've been collapsing that cavern.

MATT: You manage to make a way where the central focal point of this cavern's entrance, you manage to eventually carve all the stone to close it off.

MARISHA: Okay. Tiberius!

ORION: Yes?

MARISHA: Has your brother gotten back to you yet? ORION: He should've got the message immediately. I'm pretty sure he's researching it before he answers.

MATT: About 20 minutes of you doing this, as you're having this discussion, a small slip of parchment apparates in front of you with a flash of purplish energy. Written upon it, it says, “Tiberius, you speak of the Far Realm, which I am quite familiar with; there are many aberrations. However, I do not know the name K'Varn per se. In my research, there are many things that can fall under the description you say. It's vague enough. Unfortunately, I have not much to go off of. If you had an image or a visual description of this creature I'd be able to help, but at the moment I have no way of giving you any more knowledge. My apologies,” and signed at the bottom.

SAM: May I see this? (sniffs) Hmm, Draconiar Noir.

(all laugh)

ORION: You are astute. I say all that stuff out loud.

TRAVIS: I start digging a ditch with my axe in the sand.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: What are you digging there, Grog?

TALIESIN: I'm going to work on the camouflage.

TRAVIS: Don't worry about it.

MATT: Go ahead and make another tinker check.

SAM: Are we in the cavern? No, we're on the beach, right?

MATT: You guys are on the beach.

SAM: Oh, thank god.

LAURA: Can we hear any kind of movement coming from the other island? Does it seem like they heard those explosions? Are we safe here?

MATT: The island itself I'd say is about a quarter- to a half-mile away. It's hard to tell from this distance with no light source, any movement whatsoever over there, or any sound they make over there.

LIAM: Oh, so it's really dark?

MATT: Yes, other than the bioluminescent fungal plant life and forest that coats this side. You have no light source on that side whatsoever.

LIAM: All right.

LAURA: Okay.

MATT: And it's just faint enough where you can make out the outline of the island itself, but beyond that you have very little visual.

SAM: Let's sleep.

MARISHA: Is there any type of stone or rock or debris with the residual energy from the purple mists of the Far Realm?

MATT: It doesn't necessarily cling. It's more of a presence thing than it is a material clinging energy.

MARISHA: Okay.

LIAM: Also, I'm sorry, if it's this dark in here, we lit up the cave. Anyone on that island would have seen that. I don't think it's very safe here.

SAM: Where do you want to go?

LAURA: He's doing a camouflage-y thing, and she can make it look like nothing's on the–

LIAM: I know that, but no one camouflaged the explosion of fire that lit up the cave.

SAM: Then let's get out of here. Why don't we go to the island and see if we can make camp?

TALIESIN: Let's head to those little buildings off the corner there.

MARISHA: Not yet.

LAURA: Hide?

ORION: I do not think that is wise.

SAM: What? What's wrong?

MARISHA: I'm going to sit down near where the Far Plane portal is.

MATT: Which you already closed off at this point in time.

MARISHA: I want to be near it, though.

MATT: So you're near the edge of the wall where you've already blocked it off?

MARISHA: Right.

MATT: Okay. So you get closer to that presence.

MARISHA: Yeah, so I can be close to it. And Clarota? Pike? Do any of you want to help me in this?

SAM: What are you doing?

MARISHA: I'm going to do my scrying spell.

SAM: Oh, okay.

ASHLEY: I can assist because I have that, as well.

MATT: You do have Scrying as a spell. I would say if you both expend– if you have it prepared. Do you have scrying prepared?

ASHLEY: No.

(all laugh)

MATT: All right, well, we'll see what we can do.

MARISHA: Can I say that because I prepared it, I can be like, “Here's my book. You can borrow it. I wrote it down. I know you know it.”

MATT: Well, see, for druids, it's not so much a spellbook more than it is just an innate nature. You have a book for your own note-taking, but the actual spell itself comes from you harnessing the divine energy of nature around you. So there wouldn't be a way that it should be able to help you in that spell, more than a slight bonus to the DC, but I'll keep that in mind.

MARISHA: Scanlan, can you give me some meditation music?

SAM: Would that help at all?

MATT: Yeah. Definitely would give inspiration.

ORION: Your Highness, hold on a second, wait a minute!

MARISHA: What?

ORION: I think we're doing this a bit prematurely.

MARISHA: Why?

SAM: She can do it again tomorrow.

ORION: If she fails, he will know where we are.

LAURA: Yeah.

SAM: True.

MARISHA: He knows we're here already! He possessed the queen and said, “Welcome, you're my treasured guests.” Remember that? He knows exactly where we are!

SAM: That's a good impression.

ASHLEY: That's a really good point.

TALIESIN: It is actually very good.

ORION: It was because he had eyes to look through.

MARISHA: He seems to be pretty powerful and all-knowing. I'm pretty sure he probably knows we're fucking here.

TALIESIN: I think this is a reasonable risk.

LAURA: He's probably just playing with us right now, waiting for us to get there.

MARISHA: He said, “You are our treasured guests.” I wrote it down.

LIAM: He knows we're coming.

MARISHA: He knows we're coming. He wants us to come.

TRAVIS: To inspire Keyleth with her scrying spell, I hop in the ditch I've been digging and start going, "Look, I can do it too! (laughs)” And I start paddling in the ditch.

MARISHA: Oh! Good job, Grog! You did it!

TRAVIS: Is that inspiration?

MATT: You feel inspired. MARISHA: Besides, we're talking about moving anyway, right? So I might as well do it here if we're going to relocate. Plus, I want to be near the energy of the Far Realm. Maybe it'll help a little bit?

MATT: It's possible.

MARISHA: It's what I'm hoping for.

TALIESIN: Let's go for it.

SAM: All right! So I'll sing to inspire her. “Scry, scry, Miss Keyleth, scry, put your eyeballs to the K'Varn and tell us why.” All right, no, that's it.

TALIESIN: Singing, “This will be the day that I scry.”

ALL: “This will be the day that I scry!”

(all laugh)

MATT: All right, then.

MARISHA: So wait, do I get two inspiration dice?

MATT: No. You can only have one inspiration dice at any given point in time, and it's a d10.

MARISHA: Okay, but I'm happy because of Grog, right?

MATT: You are!

SAM: Yes. You get happiness.

MATT: So you're smiling through the spell. (laughs) All right, so, you take ten minutes to yourself to prepare the ritual. You carve out a portion of the beach where the gravel is most easy to manipulate, and you begin to set up this extensive scrying ritual.

MARISHA: And I want to meditate specifically on the horn, and I want to use Pike and see if I can channel her vision, focusing on the horn, since that's what we really know. It's pretty much the only thing we know what it looks like.

MATT: Okay. So, as you draw the circle across the portion of the gravel and stonework– actually, this is further in the cave, so the gravel has given in to more solid stonework. You begin to carve across the ground with a small piece of charcoal that you use for your ritual drawings, this giant, runic circle. You draw points for you to sit and a point for Pike to sit as well, to help you focus in this vision. Once you've taken the ten minutes to establish all the various material components and littered it with pieces of dried animal matter, some herbs, and lit a small bowl of incense on the side to help you in this spell, you sit down, take your place. Pike, you take your place. And you begin to concentrate. You draw the essence of the nature energies around you and begin to project your vision towards the description of this dark horn, pushing what you can best ascertain is the direction of the temple from where this ritual is being conducted. All right, so. Given the circumstances… bonus from that, let's make a will save. All right. So. You feel your vision project beyond you. It's a sort of out-of-body experience as the energy that makes up Keyleth is no longer given physical form, it's just adrift in the darkness. You feel yourself drawn, pulled almost, like there's an energy that draws you as if poison from a wound. It pulls you upward, and you're looking down over the top of this entire cavern, suddenly. The darkness tends to fade for a moment, and you can make out the general outline of this island. Once again, your vision (shhh) zooms in and shifts. You can look over the city. You can see Yug'Voril over top. You can see the glowing aspects of the forest surrounding the outskirts of it. And you can see in the center of this ruined city that has been reconstructed in the image of the temple that stands. This giant pseudo-pyramid with a flattened top. You can now see it from the overhead view of this temple. It is actually open, and that strange glowing source of green energy you can see is slowly emanating from the top. Your vision is pulled forward again. You feel yourself drawn towards it, and as you come towards the top, you can see: the open portion of this temple's roof is a crossbeam made of gold or brass, and there is some sort of structure hanging from it that falls deeper into the temple. You then move past this into what is the topmost chamber of this temple. It's darker at first, and as your essence tends to coalesce and find some sort of visual here, you can see now, this brass cross-beam that is held aloft in the center of this temple chamber drips down into a spiral of metal, this strange, arcane contraption that does not match any of the construct of this temple previously. It almost seems like it's been a new addition or is taking the place of something else that was a central focus of this chamber. You follow this strange arcane structure. About 15 to 20 feet it comes from the top of the temple chamber to the center, there held aloft underneath it by another 15-foot drop, you see in this dark room a pool of a dull, bluish purple liquid. And it's pulsing with life, and with energy. You now look down, your eyes focus, and in this pool, this ten, 15-foot-wide round pool, you can see this pulse, almost a heartbeat of purplish energy, what look like small purple stones. But they're not stones, they're minds. They're brains. They're essences. And they're all working together, interconnected. You're looking upon the Elder Brain of Yug'Voril, the center of the entire illithid colony that resides in the center of this chamber. You can see now this green energy that's being brought down from this metallic structure at the top of this temple is being funneled down over, and is acting as an arcane prison for, the Elder Brain. It's sealing and controlling, essentially, and what you had gathered from your previous discussions with Clarota, this is what has taken the minds of the mind flayers and bent them to K'Varn's will. Your focus shifts now from the Elder Brain, and you look around the room, and in the dark shadows of this room, you can see there are cages. There are metal bars. You're unable to really ascertain what the material is, but in each one of these small cages you see some creature. Some of this realm, some not. Horrible forms: mutated, torn, some missing limbs, some in the process of slowly dying because they're unable to keep a physical form intact. It's a collection, a horrible collection of malformed entities that are being experimented on. Pulled apart, put together. This also serves as, seemingly, a laboratory for K'Varn. And you feel a presence in the room, suddenly. Your essence shifts around and you look in the darkness and you see, slowly drifting out of the shadow, a single gnarled black horn. Underneath that horn, you can see now the physical form that it adorns: dark brown leathery skin with slightly pointed edges, almost like scales that form out of portions of this flesh. You see below this horn one large, piercing, sky-blue eye that glances up and meets your gaze. As it does, from beneath that eye, you see a toothy maw tear into a wide grin. And around the outskirts of the singular eye, numerous other eyes (whoosh whoosh) shift around. Coming into the light, you see now a fleshy ball that is drifting in the air itself under its own physical form. This aberration, this horrible entity is now floating forward. You can see metal plates that are grafted to the physical body of this creature.

MARISHA: Oh, come on!

MATT: Apparently K'Varn has experimented on itself. These eyes are attached to strange finger-like stalks that twist out of its body. These eyes, darting around the room, looking at different directions, and then they all (whoosh) singularly shift on you at once. As it does, you can feel, all of a sudden, your presence, which has been drifting through the scrying spell, locked in place. And for a second, you feel like you can't breathe. As K'Varn presses towards you, this fleshy sphere of eyestalks and teeth, this small chuckle billows up deep within its mouth. “(chuckles) So, guest. Do you like my home? You're welcome any time.” At which point, the horn seems to glow with this creepy greenish energy, and you feel this piercing pain blast into your head. You try and scream, but you can't. There's no breath. Go ahead and make a wisdom saving throw.

LAURA: Oh no!

SAM: Oh, shit. Oh god.

MARISHA: Do I still have my Enhance Ability up?

MATT: No, because that's a concentration spell.

LIAM: What does Keyleth look like to us right now?

MATT: Keyleth is sweating profusely, and you can see she's flinching.

LIAM: I'm walking up to Keyleth and I'm grabbing her by the shirt and I'm going to slap her across the face.

MATT: All right. So?

MARISHA: 27.

MATT: 27. All right. Good. You take 11 points of psychic damage and are thrust out of the scry spell. Your vision is pulled out of the top of the temple and suddenly you're back in your form as a sharp pain hits you across the side of the head.

MARISHA: Ow!

MATT: Vax is holding you.

MARISHA: Christ! What– why?! LIAM: You were in pain. Are you all right? Are you all right?

MARISHA: “You were in pain, so I thought I'd fucking slap you across the face?” Gee!

LAURA: Keyleth! Language.

TRAVIS: Are we hitting each other now?

MARISHA: Sorry. Wow.

ORION AND LAURA: What did you see?

ORION: So she tells us, right?

MARISHA: K'Varn's a beholder.

LAURA: (gasps)

SAM: A beholder? What's that?

ORION: It is really not a thing we want to fight. It is awful. It is wretched. It will kill all of us if we don't find out a way to kill it– oh my god.

MARISHA: Not only is K'Varn a beholder, K'Varn has been experimenting on himself and so he has armor grafted onto him, and the horn The horn which– I don't know.

LAURA: You said there is something caging the Elder Brain right?

MARISHA: Yes. That big green light. Can, we can see it? Is it like the Luxor in Vegas? Can we see the green light?

MATT: It's not a beam, but you do see a slight green glow at the top of the temple in the distance. You saw it when you first entered, and it's been this dull beacon as you traveled around this island.

LAURA: So there's something connected to the top of the temple that's caging the Elder Brain?

MARISHA: It's like an arcane prison around all of the Elder Brain.

LAURA: Is it possible to maybe collapse the top of the temple from far away, and release the Elder Brain from its cage and then Clarota, your brethren could fight the beholder instead of us? (laughs)

MARISHA: Clarota, do you know how we could possibly break this prison?

TRAVIS: Could you tell me what a beholder is first? Because I don't know.

SAM: Big bad scary thing.

TRAVIS: With finger eyes?

ORION: DM, I write a detailed–

SAM: Just hold on. Wait. Patience.

MATT: That's a beholder.

LAURA: Oh, the thing on the front of the Monster Manual.

ASHLEY: It's on the cover of a book.

TRAVIS: Worst possible scenario imaginable.

LAURA: That's all you could have said.

LIAM: The iconic creature.

TALIESIN: It's on the cover of Dungeons & Dragons Monthly right now. It is the cover model.

LIAM: There's dragon, then beholder.

MARISHA: Oh, man.

LAURA: I mean, we've killed a dragon.

TRAVIS: Yeah he's got lots of teeth. Let's brush 'em.

MARISHA: Each eye tends to have a beam that has a different ability.

SAM: Yes.

LAURA: Oh.

LIAM: It's a magic fun bag.

MARISHA: It's a magic fun bag. It's probably got everything from Silence and Dispel Magic to Petrify to a disintegration ray.

TALIESIN: You're thinking about this wrong, though. You're thinking about this in the wrong direction. Beholder is not– that's not the goal.

LAURA: The horn is the goal.

TALIESIN: Even more than that, it's the hundreds of allies we could have.

LAURA: Exactly! We free the Elder Brain, they attack it.

TALIESIN: Prison is the target.

TRAVIS: Not the beholder?

TALIESIN: Not the beholder. If we can free the Elder Brain–

LAURA: We don't have to fight it ourselves.

TALIESIN: Then we're not alone. Now, what was creating this green light? Where was it emanating from?

MARISHA: It seemed to be emanating from the top opening of this pyramid that was the main temple of the center of town.

TALIESIN: Can you describe the top of the pyramid?

MATT: I'll give you a detailed description. Essentially, this pyramid comes to a top and then flattens up at the very top. Where you would expect there to be a flat surface is instead, essentially, a windowed opening. You don't think it's purely open like you could just jump through. There is some sort of glass that coats it, but there is a brass cross-beam at the very top, and then part of this cross-beam holds aloft this strange series of metallic wires that spiral and intertwine that serves as a conical focus piece. You can't see the interior of it.

LAURA: So if we take out the beams–

MARISHA: It was almost like a beehive.

MATT: Essentially a slow beehive.

MARISHA: It was focusing the energy.

TALIESIN: We have something very important. We have a vial of yellow liquid.

SAM: What does it do?

LAURA: It might age you.

MARISHA: We don't know.

LAURA: It might do something.

TALIESIN: It seems to be very acidic.

SAM: So it could burn the metal?

ASHLEY: Burn the beams?

TALIESIN: I could melt the metal and we could actually bring that entire structure crashing down.

LAURA: But does anybody have an aging spell? Something that causes things to disintegrate things? Maybe we could rust the metal as well?

TALIESIN: We have that yellow goop, and that would definitely help.

LIAM: We know that it's acid?

TALIESIN: We suspect it.

LAURA: It might be a form changer, because the king swallowed a vial and it made him strong.

MARISHA: Actually, I can learn Heat Metal and I can heat the beam and make it (clicks her tongue) beam.

LAURA: He's got vials of acid in his Bag of Holding.

ASHLEY: Excellent.

TALIESIN: We're going to break the temple.

LAURA: Let's break the temple. Clarota?

MATT: At this point, as you guys look over at Clarota, you see Clarota, for the first time in a while, looks visually disturbed. Has withdrawn from the group and is leaning against the side of the beach cavern wall and the tentacles that normally slowly twirl are all tensed and pulled up into a knot.

LAURA: Clarota, you're going to cramp your face if you do that.

TALIESIN: If you have something to say, we would appreciate it.

LIAM: If you keep making that face, it'll freeze that way.

MATT: “That K'Varn is of this new creature, a beholder, and carries this horn that Lady Kima has spoken of. It's a great danger. Also, keep in mind the temple is not made of average stolen metals. This is the center of the Elder Brain. We reinforce it with magical protection. It's the center of our entire species' kowledge. Every brain in there is our elders'. As we pass to the next generation, our mind is brought and introduced to the Elder Brain. We have that room protected from simple acids. We must make sure we are ready.”

LIAM: Clarota, Keyleth has scryed the top of the building right now. It didn't look like it was part of the original structure. Is she mistaken? Is the top something that was built by your people?

MATT: “No. It was open before. There seems to be some sort of new focus K'Varn has constructed.”

LIAM: Would that be as strong as the rest of the building?

MATT: “I do not know. But if I've seen anything of the nature of this insidious creature, I would say, plan for the worst. Nothing, nothing is more terrifying than underestimating a beholder.”

LAURA: Right. Can beholders fly?

MARISHA: Yeah.

LAURA: They can. Okay.

TRAVIS: Among other things, it seems like.

LAURA: What can't they do?

LIAM: Not much.

TALIESIN: They're terrible monsters.

LAURA: So they're really very fleshy and weak, but he put armor on himself.

TRAVIS: He's super strong.

LAURA: So now he's extra strong.

LIAM: Like a wizard times 50.

MARISHA: I'm assuming– oh, go ahead.

MATT: Then Kima says, “The key is here is not to think how to fight him head-on. We have to be smart about this. While he has the home turf, we have the element of surprise. We choose the grounds in which we attack, and we choose the methods in which we set the battlefield.”

MARISHA: Underwater fight!

SAM: We could try to just draw him out somehow.

MATT: “I highly doubt he's going to leave his home turf. But if we can find a way to perhaps turn it against him or use it to our advantage. Maybe some reconnaissance. I don't know.”

LAURA: Reconnaissance!

MATT: “I don't know!”

TRAVIS: It is glass on the top, so we could try to Sunlight the head?

ASHLEY: I have something called Divine Intervention.

LAURA: What is that?

ASHLEY: You can call on your deity, and you roll a percentile die, and you can have them help you with something.

LAURA: So is it possible to try to get her help before we do this? Or is it something that you have to do on the spot?

ASHLEY: I don't know, because this is new.

MATT: That's up to you. You can attempt it once a day, and once it works, it can't be done for another week.

LAURA: So if we attempt it, then she can intervene? She can be on our side?

MATT: In some way. Essentially, you formulate how you want your deity's aid. And if you succeed– you have a 10% chance of success– in some divine way, Sarenrae will guide power or aid to you.

SAM: Why don't you wait on that.

LIAM: Well, we either have a 10% chance right now for her to tell us what to do–

LIAM: Or a 10% chance–

SAM: To help us later.

LAURA: Once we know what we're doing.

ASHLEY: Yeah, let's wait until we know what we're doing.

ORION: I believe we should go and rescue the prisoners and build a small army. Moreover, I've been thinking. It all goes downward, correct? He's all up in a pit, yes?

SAM: The world down here?

ORION: No, the beholder, K'Varn.

LIAM: He's in the top of a pyramid.

ORION: Up or down?

LIAM AND TRAVIS: Up.

ORION: Well, that won't help me at all.

MARISHA: It's his laboratory.

LAURA: I feel like we should go for the top.

TRAVIS: How would we free the prisoners, first of all?

TALIESIN: I think it's that beehive structure.

LAURA: We have to take out the metal thingy.

LIAM: It's not letting them out. We have to get them out of K'Varn's control. So how do we do that?

TALIESIN: I think we destroy the beehive structure at the top.

LAURA: I think we destroy the structure.

LIAM: It's the only option that seems open to us, unless we keep stumbling around and looking for some other way, I think.

LAURA: We don't have any kind of corruption spell that ages things?

MARISHA: Well, we've got the acid thing, and maybe Grog can–

LAURA: What if we hit it with Dispel Magic, maybe get your goddess's aid– hit it with Dispel Magic, hit it with corruption, rust the shit, and then it falls!

SAM: But we don't have corruption.

LIAM: Can Scanlan mercilessly mock the top of the thing?

SAM: Oh, I can mock.

TRAVIS: Eff you, brass cross!

MARISHA: I like Percy's idea. We've got that acidic vial.

TALIESIN: We have several vials of acid, actually.

ASHLEY: Can you take the normal acid and could we make it magical?

LAURA: Like, extra bad? We don't even know what it does yet.

MARISHA: Well, I can always be an eagle, and I can maybe fly, or maybe Grog could carry a big boulder. That way, after the acid has–

TALIESIN: I thought about making an acid arrow. I really did.

MARISHA: He could throw a big boulder to collapse it the rest of the way.

LIAM: Question. You built a bomb before.

SAM: That took months.

LIAM: If we could hole up for– months or weeks, was it?

LAURA AND SAM: Months.

TRAVIS: Yeah, it took months.

TALIESIN: It took me months to figure out how to build.

LIAM: Now that you know how to build one, would it be quicker?

MARISHA: Wait, the bomb we just threw in that room?

TALIESIN: I could make an exploding arrow. I've made one, I can make another.

MATT: I would say your materials are very limited.

TALIESIN: Yeah. At this point, though, if I had a workshop, I could–

SAM: Well, let's take Kima's advice and maybe start with a little reconnaissance. We'll get closer, we'll rest for the night, and maybe send in a snooping party.

LIAM: My sister says that island is crawling with nasty shits.

LAURA: We can't get closer.

ASHLEY: We should just rest. We'll stay up, because we're good.

LAURA: What if we fly in over the top with the carpet in stealth, put the camouflage on the carpet so they don't see it. Fly in over the top. Stealth in, spy, get an idea of–

LIAM: Inspect the top of the building, see where the acid would be put to good use.

LAURA: Yeah, see what kind of magic is being held on top of it.

LIAM: We're guessing that K'Varn doesn't want to leave his little cubby-hole.

TALIESIN: I would assume not.

LIAM: So even if we fly down on top, he gets pissed, he could fly up, but we could fly away. He probably doesn't want to leave the top of the–

TALIESIN: There's going to come a point where chaos is just going to descend on us.

TRAVIS: We're also forgetting that the second that he sees us or we get close enough, he could control all of our minds.

SAM: Wasn't the point of us going to these beaches to try to see if there was any other advantage we could find?

LAURA: We were trying to find clues so that maybe scrying could be helpful, which it was.

MARISHA: Yeah.

SAM: All right.

LAURA: Okay, here's another option: Dimension Door. What if you go and hug one of the beams and Dimension Door the beam out?

SAM: I don't think I can do that.

ORION: No.

SAM: I can banish a being, but not a beam.

LAURA: You can't cast a portal on the door and make it fall?

TALIESIN: No, sadly.

LAURA: Not like Portal?

LIAM: Well, we've been here, and we've been here. SAM: Should we go to one more beach before we all die?

LIAM: Here, or here, or this little nubbin right here?

TALIESIN: I was thinking about that.

LAURA: Those are just more things to fight.

LIAM: Well, that's true, but my sister studied the island, and she sensed the presence of things everywhere.

TRAVIS: That sounds awesome. Let's go there.

MATT: Clustered mainly in the city region.

MARISHA: There's no need for us to relocate now.

LIAM: Well I am curious about this. Can we see this from the beach we're on? What is this?

MATT: At this distance, it's hard to make out any sort of visual.

TALIESIN: We could camp there. That could be where we stage our attack from.

TRAVIS: Yeah, I like that. Let's go take over a little shanty-town.

MARISHA: Wait. Why?

SAM: Because it'll be that much closer tomorrow. We can do reconnaissance from there.

MARISHA: We can do reconnaissance from where we are.

SAM: We still have to get across this body of water. You said there's something swimming down there.

MARISHA: We've got a magic carpet.

TRAVIS: It'll be a little victory. We'll take over the shanty-town.

MARISHA: It's literally never been a problem.

ASHLEY: Can we all fit on the magic carpet?

LAURA AND TRAVIS: No.

MATT: Not at once, no.

ASHLEY: I can water-walk.

LIAM: We can also do two trips on the carpet.

MARISHA: But we're not all going for reconnaissance, are we?

LAURA: No, stealthy stealth.

TALIESIN: If something goes wrong, though, it's going to be– I would rather something go wrong with all of us than something go wrong with half of us.

LIAM: Well, I tell you what. We don't know what to do, so why don't Vex and I and Scanlan go for a little ride and check out the tip of this island?

ASHLEY: I don't want to be split up.

TRAVIS: I don't, either. Let's take over the shanty-town. Let's at least get on the island.

SAM AND TALIESIN: Baby steps.

TRAVIS: Yeah, baby steps.

MARISHA: Okay, well, then you guys go check it out first.

TALIESIN: We'll get in the boat and we'll start heading there.

ASHLEY: Are we getting on the boat or doing the carpet?

TALIESIN: Well, we can't all fit on the carpet.

LIAM: Let's let Tiberius and the twins and Scanlan fly ahead of the boat, uietly, carefully, see what we see. We have the earrings that Tibber-hoods crafted for us, so we can tell you what we see.

TALIESIN: Perfect.

LIAM: And we don't want to rush in. We're probably going to go here, but let's not rush in. Let the quiet ones go have a look.

LAURA: Just to make sure it's not crawling with baddies.

MARISHA: Okay. So we'll start boating over.

LIAM: You need to take it easy for a moment. You just went through some shit, Keyleth.

ASHLEY: You guys are going on the carpet?

LAURA: Yeah.

MARISHA: Yeah, I'm going to take the boat.

TRAVIS: I've got a big axe. I'll paddle the boat towards the island.

MARISHA: Awesome.

TRAVIS: I've been practicing in the sand to impress Keyleth. Working on the elevator. I haven't figured it out yet, because I don't know what that is.

LIAM: You know that thing a dog does when it pulls its butt along the floor?

LAURA: But I could cast Pass Without a Trace so everybody gets +10 to their stealth rolls.

LIAM: Yeah, that sounds good.

TRAVIS: So who's in the boat with me?

SAM: Oh, we're going over? By boat? Is that what's happening?

TRAVIS: Percy, Keyleth.

LAURA: Trinket.

TRAVIS: Pike and Trinket. So we start paddling in the boat.

LAURA: How about Kima and Clarota? Clarota should go with us.

MATT: Clarota can just hover.

LAURA: Can Clarota be on the carpet, then?

MATT: You can have him alongside the carpet.

TRAVIS: Yeah, we'll take Kima.

LIAM: Yes.

LAURA: Yeah, Clarota come with us.

TRAVIS: (singing) Love Boat.

MATT: So Percy, you're on the boat as well?

TALIESIN: Yeah, I'm in the boat.

SAM: Are the rest of us flying? We're flying.

LIAM: Team Clarence and Team Kima-gibbler.

TRAVIS: Watch your mouth.

LAURA: Clarota, I'm sure we've asked this before and I wasn't here because I missed a part of a thing? What about your hat? What does it do? Can you make more of them?

LIAM: He said no, it would take a while.

SAM: We did this already.

MATT: “I could, but the time required would be months, weeks. "Not in our timeframe, I believe.”

TRAVIS: That's squid for no.

LAURA: All right.

LIAM: All right, let's do it. Quiet ones, let's get on the carpet. iberius?

LAURA: Try to stealth it. Are we camouflaging the carpet?

TALIESIN: I'm going to attempt to attach the skin to the bottom of the carpet.

MATT: To the bottom of the carpet?

LIAM: We're saving the world, here, people. Let's not twiddle our thumbs for too long.

TRAVIS: But you're on the boat.

TALIESIN: Well, before you guys take off. Just going to try and sew it on the corners.

MATT: Okay, go ahead and make a roll.

TALIESIN: That's better. 16.

MATT: 16. Easy enough to do. All right, so you take a little bit of your thick, heavy leather thread, the stuff that you use for something, and you loosely attach it to the bottom of the carpet.

LIAM: Sorry, I did a quick scrying spell and I know that we're 50 shirts away from the total, so keep going. Get your mother a shirt. Keep going.

SAM: Okay, so we're over the water?

TRAVIS: Yeah, we're already paddling. The boat's going too. We're fucking fast.

MATT: So, as Grog's pulling along– make an athletics check, by the way.

TRAVIS: Oh yeah, about to smash you.

LAURA: And we're stealthing? Ahead?

MATT: You guys are–

LAURA: Being sneaky.

TRAVIS: It's a 22.

MATT: All right, so. You pull it across. It's a slow speed, but you're making your way. I would also like Grog to make a stealth check.

LAURA: I rolled a natural 20 on stealth.

TRAVIS: Where's my stealth?

TALIESIN: You've got Pass Without a Trace also.

TRAVIS: 19. So 29.

MATT: 29 stealth. As you're very carefully breaking the water's surface– Okay, so as you guys make your way across the channel towards the far end of the island, which is the beach that's in view, you see the water disturbed slightly about 200 feet off to the right. Something deep below. You can see bubbles rising up. As you carefully make your way, ever so quiet, across to the beach, you find purchase. Landfall hits you on the other side of the beach, apparently not disturbing whatever lies beneath the surface.

TRAVIS: I immediately hop out, pull the boat up just to beach the boat.

MATT: Okay, so you pull the boat up. The rest of you guys bring the carpet over. You come to a landing part, totally fine. The beach comes to a steep incline that leads up onto the island proper. There's cliffs on both sides of this beach, and as the incline increases up about maybe 500, 600 feet from where you are, you can see what looks like a few buildings or rubble of what was a small gathering of structures.

LAURA: Can we check out the thing in the air?

LIAM: Is there a larger one behind those smaller structures?

LAURA: That was it.

MATT: What you're seeing now is this.

TRAVIS: Are there any of those crazy trees you mentioned before?

MATT: You do see, towards the right of those structures, those fungal-based trees. They rise about 25, 30 feet in the air. There's no leaves. It's almost like a cluster of weird fungus-like vines that drift from the top surface, and the trees unnaturally sway in place, almost like they have a rhythm to their movement.

TRAVIS: Dr. Seuss trees. Not cool.

MATT: Really nasty Dr. Seuss trees.

LAURA: Clarota, will those trees attack us? Are they living and attack-y?

MATT: Clarota says, “No, those trees merely exist on this island. They feed off of the essence of it and they provide food for other things that live here.”

TRAVIS: Like what?

MARISHA: Trees are bad?

MATT: “Wandering spores.”

LAURA: Wandering spores?!

MATT: “Other creatures.”

TRAVIS: Other creatures?

MATT: “We feed our captives, our slaves of the colony, with the fungal essence of the tree.”

TRAVIS: Other creatures? Don't skimp on the details, it's only our lives.

MATT: “The trees are not dangerous, but whatever resides on this island is probably under the influence of the Elder Brain. And my people, which are in turn under the influence of K'Varn.”

LIAM: But as you're from this island, what wildlife can we expect to run into here?

MATT: “Small, sightless rats. Cavern insects. But the dangers lie in the spores that wander the forests.”

LAURA: I'm picturing a big yellow thing with little legs.

SAM: Pus.

LIAM: Fuzzball.

LAURA: Is that what it is?

MATT: “You'll know when you see it.”

LAURA: Well, that's lovely. Thank you for your help.

MATT: “Spiny.”

LAURA: Spiny.

MATT: “Drifting.”

TRAVIS: I take the cask of ale out of the Bag of Holding and pour him a little glass of ale, and I'm like–

LAURA: Oh, you know what, Grog, I hate to tell you this–

TRAVIS: It sounds a little scratchy. Would you care for some ale?

LIAM: It's really good.

MATT: It's a psychic discussion. He looks at you and gives you a stern look. Takes the ale from you.

TRAVIS: Why?

MATT: “I have no need for such false sustenance.”

LIAM: Clarota, that was rude.

TRAVIS: I will not forget that.

LIAM: Very rude. All right.

SAM: Can we go inspect those structures up there?

LIAM: Yes, everyone wait here. I grab Scanlan by the scruff of the neck and nod at my sister.

SAM: I turn invisible.

LIAM: Let's go take a peek, yes? We'll take a peek. Just wait a minute.

TALIESIN: We can wait. That's fine.

MARISHA: I actually go collect a few of the vines hanging from the trees.

MATT: All right. Go ahead and make a nature check.

TALIESIN: General perception check on the beach as well.

MATT: All right.

TALIESIN: I don't know why I'm bothering. 11. It's a beach.

TRAVIS: I rolled 15.

MARISHA: 16.

MATT: 16 on nature? Okay, from a safe distance, you look at it. The trees do not appear to be anything beyond a subterranean forest. Fungal trees.

MARISHA: I wanted to collect some.

MATT: Oh, you wanted to go over and collect some? Okay. It's quite a ways up. It's up the side of the cliff. It's up an incline, and the forest starts adjacent to the structure where they're going.

TALIESIN: Might want to wait.

MATT: So you can make a stealth check to make your way there, if you'd like.

MARISHA: No, I'll wait. I thought we were next to a tree.

MATT: No, most of the forest starts further up this incline as the island itself begins to level off.

TALIESIN: Let the scouts scout.

SAM: Let's go scout it out.

MATT: All right.

SAM: So we make our way up to the structure.

LIAM: 28 for stealth.

MATT: 28 for stealth. You get advantage on your roll.

LAURA: Is it our old stealth check? Can I use my flying stealth check? Damn it.

SAM: Nope.

MATT: What did you roll?

SAM: Three.

MATT: With advantage?

SAM: That was my advantage. The first one was a one.

(all laugh)

LAURA: 31.

TRAVIS: Holy shit.

MATT: All right. So.

LIAM: Do the twins outweigh him?

SAM: Wait, plus two! That makes it five.

LAURA: Plus ten. Pass Without a Trace.

SAM: Oh, plus ten! That's 15!

TRAVIS: We're getting better! Plus my inspiration from paddling.

MATT: You guys make your way towards this ruin, and as you come to it, you caught a small glimmer of it on the bridge that was constructed across the first beach you came across in this cavern. The stonework is interesting. It's almost like an influx of jade and marble. The stone itself does not seem to be anything you've seen naturally around the cavern; either it was brought here or was crafted from some substance that resides on this island. But it has this weird green jade, marble, almost… vein-like visual to it. And you notice all the structures aren't straight and smooth. Everything has this slightly non-Euclidean bend to it. Every edge has a slight curve. It's off-putting. There isn't a rigidity to any of these walls, and the buildings themselves almost seem to sag, or they sit or rest at a strange, unnatural angle.

LAURA: These buildings are sad.

MATT: Many have been long-crumbled, and you find some of these buildings have fallen in on themselves. You do notice, as you approach the edge of it, there is a large, circular structure. A pit that is built central to this. Parts of the wall have fallen in, but for the most part still remains intact, and in the center of this pit, on the floor, you can see what looks like splotches of dried crimson, long-left blood splatters of some sort of creature. You see dried bones, but the bones, while dried, have some sort of fungus growing on them. You also see what looks to be, tucked against one of the walls, a campsite. But a very large campsite. The fire pit is 15 feet wide and is just a small cinder. You see what looks to be a pile of furs.

SAM: A recent campsite?

MATT: There is actual embers in the fire pit. There looks to be a large bedroll made of patchwork furs, but the pile itself is huge.

LIAM: But it looks twice the size of what I would use for a fire, or what I would use for a bedroll.

MATT: Three times, even, which means it houses a lot of individuals.

SAM: Or one big thing.

MARISHA: Or a really big thing.

LIAM: Giants.

MARISHA: Yeah.

TRAVIS: (laughs)

MATT: As you're taking this look, too, as you guys are having this visual, you–

LIAM: Question: bigger than Grog?

MATT: Well. You immediately hear a sound. It's a slight rumble in the ground and what sounds like a footfall, and as you glance over your shoulder, you can see what looks to be some sort of towering humanoid dragging something behind it.

SAM: (singing) There are giants in the sky.

MATT: It glances up with its nose in the air (sniffs). “Who goes there?” And you look to see what looks large, almost goliath-like: bald, skin is smooth, no hair, but its skin is purplish in color. Where a normal giant would stand naturally, it's horribly hunched, like its back has a horrible scoliosis twist to it. One giant popping yellow eye glances out towards the edge of where you guys are. It doesn't seem to have found any of you immediately, but something has alerted its attention; it seems to have caught some sort of trail in its natural homestead. You see it standing probably close to 15, 20 feet in height as it begins lumbering up (krsh krsh krsh) towards you.

LIAM: Stealthed.

LAURA: Oh, should we hide? Can we try to hide?

MATT: All of you were stealthed as well.

LAURA: Oh, yeah. Can I do insight and see if it seems like a bad guy?

MATT: You can make an insight check.

LAURA: I know. I'm just checking to see if he's a misunderstood guy.

TRAVIS: Do I see him? Can I do a simple recognize check?

MATT: You don't see him. All you guys are staying back at the beach while they're checking.

ORION: Both of you have got earrings.

LAURA: That's 17.

MATT: 17? This entity looks like it's hungry, it looks malicious, and looks like it's caught the thrill of the hunt, since it seems to have seen something near its homestead moving. As it begins to step forward, it drops whatever it's holding behind it.

LIAM: I'm picking up Scanlan and moving backwards.

LAURA: Yeah, can we move into the shadows?

SAM: I'm invisible.

LIAM: You're right there.

LAURA: We know where you are.

LIAM: I was holding your hand the whole time.

SAM: Okay.

MATT: And that is where we're going to leave tonight's session.

(all groan)

TRAVIS: Come on!

LIAM: Nowhere near K'Varn.

MARISHA AND TRAVIS: Really?

LIAM: Nowhere near him.

ORION: No.

MATT: Yeah.

TRAVIS: But wait, maybe if we sell out the shirts we can go another half-hour or something.

MARISHA: Yeah, how many shirts do we have left?

ORION: Like 20 or something like that?

SAM: Didn't make it. Didn't make it to K'Varn, didn't make it to the shirts.

LIAM: It's K'Varn!
Post-Game and Q&A

ZAC: We have to read all the donation messages. If we meet our goal for the shirts y the time we're done reading–

LAURA: 20 shirts!

ZAC: Then are you guys cool with doing the Q&A?

ALL: Yeah!

ZAC: All right, so.

LIAM: If you sell those 20 shirts.

TRAVIS: There's 20 shirts left?

LAURA: That's it.

LIAM: Come on, guys. 20 shirts.

LAURA: Me and Pike bought hoodies.

ZAC: Go fuck it up.

ASHLEY: I bought a hoodie.

LAURA: I bought a hoodie.

ZAC: All right, I'm just going to try to open this up here.

LAURA: We could all be hoodie Twinkies.

ORION: We have Twinkies?

TALIESIN: There's no Twinkies. There's just cake.

SAM: That was the stoner-est thing you've ever said.

LIAM: I'll buy a hoodie if you guys buy 19. Deal? Here we go.

MATT: What are you doing, man?

ZAC: I'm trying to load it into Google Docs so we can actually see the messages.

LAURA: He's taking his time.

MATT: Oh, that's much easier. In theory.

TALIESIN: I have not the slightest clue where my phone would be.

LAURA: Oh no, really?

TALIESIN: It's probably out in the hallway.

LAURA: Whoa! We're 14 shirts away!

TALIESIN: You guys are doing it.

MARISHA: 14!

ZAC: Looks like they start right here.

MATT: All right. Guys, let's get some of these read off.

ORION: Oh, yay.

TALIESIN: Yay!

MATT: So. Kurt Cole donated $100 to 826.

(all cheer)

MATT: “#GrogCrush.” Thank you, Kurt.

MARISHA: Grog crush!

MATT: Browncoat2511 also donated $100. “Thanks for inspiring our friends to finally play D&D with us. "I'm donating as a gift for my wife, Lauren.”

MATT: Hi, Lauren!

MARISHA: Aww. So sweet!

MATT: “For her 30th birthday. She's an avid reader, our D&D group's bard, and a big fan of the show.”

SAM: Bard!

ALL: Aww!

MARISHA: Happy birthday!

TALIESIN: Happy birthday.

ORION: That man loves you.

MARISHA: That's so sweet.

MATT: All right. ZandorInvictus donated $75 to 826. “#LessThanThree you guys. Excited that a week from today I get to play my first game in like seven years. Hope to do as well as you guys.” That's awesome! Zandor, have fun.

MARISHA: Yay, Zandor!

TRAVIS: That's rad.

MATT: Zofer donated $25. “Many thanks for all the time and effort you put into making Critical Role.” Well, thank you guys for watching it.

LAURA: Yes, very much.

MATT: We're glad you guys like it.

MARISHA: Thanks, Zofer!

ORION: Thank you!

MATT: TFdiggs donated 20 bucks. “So nice. Had to pick up the shirt twice.” Aww. Good man. Always look forward to having all the loins girded and all the violence encouraged. Thank you for being awesome.”

SAM: Yeah! That's us. We should do “loins encouraged” and “violence girded,” no?

MATT: Sure.

ASHLEY: Hey, guys!

SAM: What?!

LAURA AND LIAM: We did it!

(all cheer)

MATT: That's so awesome!

SAM: Liam, did you just buy 20 shirts?

LIAM: Yeah.

(all laugh)

MATT: You guys are ridiculous.

LIAM: Wow.

LAURA: That's so awesome.

TALIESIN: Holy cow.

LAURA: Oh my gosh. You guys are awesome.

ASHLEY: You guys! What the heck.

MATT: Thank you guys so much.

LIAM: Thank you guys. A thousand years of Dungeons & Dragons.

MATT: It's the best audience ever. You guys are amazing. Speaking of which, I've got to put the cloak on.

ALL: Put the cloak on!

ORION: It does get warm in here, just a little bit.

SAM: Yeah why stop at 1,000? Let's go for 2,000.

(all laugh)

ZAC: Even if we didn't make it, I feel like we had to do the Q&A because there's two $1,000 donations in here.

LAURA AND MATT: What?!

SAM AND MARISHA: Confirmed?!

MATT: All right. Hold on.

ZAC: All right, we're working our way up. We're here.

MATT: Okay. Burgtorp, 50 bucks. Awesome. “I've been wanting to play my druid dwarf after watching your show, but no DM or other player will likely satisfy me after all you guys' and gals' in-game acting. Speaking of druids, is Keyleth half-elf or elf? The overlay shows elven. Love from Sweden.” You're half-elf. We've got to fix that.

MARISHA: We still need to fix that. Yeah I'm half-elven.

MATT: We just need to fix that in the opening.

TALIESIN: On your mother's side or your father's side?

MARISHA AND LAURA: Hell elf.

TALIESIN: Hell elf.

MATT: Gil Ramirez! 10 bucks. “Hey guys, so glad to have met you at Ren Faire.” Oh, hey! What's up, Gil?

(all cheer)

MATT: Met him a few weeks back. “Let me know if you guys want those brooches made.”

TALIESIN: Oh my god, yeah. Those was awesome.

ORION: That's right.

MARISHA: We'll totally take brooches.

MATT: Kavemtg. “First time watching live after obsessively consuming the videos for two weeks. Fuck time difference.” Yeah.

(all laugh)

MATT: “I had to go for the holy trinity: tee, sub, and donation.” That's awesome. “Much deserved. Thanks for everything, guys. K. "P.S: Matt, we need DM tips column/video series.”

LAURA: Ooh.

TALIESIN: That's a really good idea.

MATT: Not a bad idea. We talked about doing it for the channel going forward, so keep an eye on that. This is really warm. I'm putting the hood down. Electricidolon. 20 bucks. “Back again this week. Got a shirt this time, too. Thank you for giving me something amazing to look forward to every week, guys. Need a Critical Role animated series. For serious.” I agree. That'd be cool.

TALIESIN: Who would voice our characters is my question.

ZAC: You call your people and we'll call our people.

MATT: Exactly. Electricidolon.

ORION: Nice!

LIAM: Can I interject for a second and thank Earl Davis, @Wheelyfactoids, for buying 8 shirts?

ORION: Holy what?!

LAURA: That's so cool.

LIAM: Thanks, dude.

MATT: That's awesome! You have Christmas on lock!

LIAM: Give them out to seven people. Start playing Dungeons & Dragons with them.

ZAC: I know that we have someone in the chat room– I'm not sure off the top of my head– someone bought the entire office shirts.

LAURA: Seriously?

ZAC: Yeah, they sent a message and asked for everyone's shirt sizes.

LAURA: That's so cool!

MATT: Why are you guys so awesome? Oh my god. Okay, NorSarah. Four bucks. Awesome.

ORION: Oh, cool!

MATT: “I would like to rage! Or donate, in this case. I love your show. It's my most favorite thing in the world. I'm joining my own D&D group because of it. Thanks for sharing your adventures with us. Heart. And remember, Keyleth: fish are friends, not food.”

MARISHA: Fish are friends, not food!

MATT: G1bigdaddyheft. 25 bucks. “TV shows can't come close to the epic power of Critical Role Thursdays. As always, thank you all for coming together and sharing your adventure with us and inspiring so many people to begin our own.” Thank you, guys. That's amazing.

TALIESIN: Hey.

MARISHA: Aww.

MATT: Argh. Mahidal, who I've met on the Minecraft servers. Awesome. Donated five bucks. “Oh man, the Critical Role crew, you remember that time we all went to Ancient Rome and they had pizza and lasers? And then we found out the Doctor was there and someone had messed with the timeline? That was a good day, and we all escaped!”

(all laugh)

MATT: AmantarayX. 20 bucks. “Watching Critical Role is the best way to spend my 21st birthday. Less than three, all of you.” Happy birthday!

ALL: Happy birthday!

MARISHA: We fought a manta ray.

MATT: You did.

TRAVIS: Oh, was that a birthday huzzah?

TRAVIS AND ASHLEY: Birthday huzzah!

MATT: All right, theinfragable donated 50 bucks. “Long time watcher, first time subber and donator. This show is awesome. You guys are awesome. Literacy and imagination is awesome, and I'll keep doing song parodies for all the characters. Here's $5 per episode.” You've been doing all the song parodies? Those are awesome!

TALIESIN: Yeah, they're so awesome!

SAM: Those are great! Love the song parodies!

MATT: Keep them coming. Those are awesome.

ORION: Oh, dude! Yeah, those are hilarious.

ZAC: So wait, there are song parodies? Can we get those?

MATT: We had the link sent to us. He did song parodies for Grog and Scanlan.

ZAC: Send us the link so we'll play them next time.

TRAVIS: It's amazing. I may or may not… have sung that at home.

LIAM: On a side “night”–

SAM: On a “side night!”

LIAM: On a side night, we'll play another game… On a side note, we love fan art. We love it. We're going to try to find a way to showcase it on the show, perhaps.

MARISHA: If you go to our website, it filters through, but as long as you hashtag Critical Role–

LAURA: We'll be able to see it.

MARISHA: We'll be able to find it.

LIAM: We'll see it, and we're looking for a way to add it.

LAURA: All of us are kind of obsessed about checking out the hashtag.

TALIESIN: It's a problem.

MARISHA: Yeah.

MATT: We go home after each game and we're up till 3am going like, “(gasp) favorite, favorite, favorite…” It's bad. It's a problem. All right, we have Killer88D, donating ten bucks. That's awesome, thank you so much. Joe Curr, 20 bucks. “I now look forward to Thursdays more than I do Fridays.”

TALIESIN AND LIAM: So do we!

MATT: “It's a great show and it introduced me to D&D. I'm enthralled. Much love, much hugs. #TeamTrinket.” Thank you so much! MisSkeMeDe, 20 bucks. “You're all such talented voice actors and are fantastically entertaining. Thanks for providing me with such an incredible introduction to D&D. Less than three.” Thanks, you're awesome. AxisOfAnarchy. Hello, what's up!

MARISHA: Axis!

ORION: Hey!

MATT: “So I thought I would start my birthday celebration two days early so I could celebrate with all of you. Less than three. Rachel Steiner aka AxisOfAnarchy.” Rachel, Happy Birthday!

MARISHA: Huzzah!

LAURA: Huzzah! Happy Birthday!

MATT: She's been updating the Reddit page with all the episode links. She's been great from the beginning. So thank you, Rachel. Happy Birthday! Cerulean Kestrel donated $50.

SAM: Wait, what's that name?

MATT AND ORION: Cerulean Kestrel.

SAM: Oh, I like that.

MATT: Might be an NPC coming forward. “For my younger brother David, who graduates college tomorrow. I admire you and everything you've achieved so far. Also, Critical Role is a blast to watch. Thanks to Matt Mercer and crew for a great show and thank you, David, for introducing me to it.”

ALL: Aww.

MARISHA: Congrats, David!

MATT: Congrats on your brother's college graduation. That's great! Scottydsntknw8?

ZAC: Doesn't know it.

MATT: Oh, “Scotty Doesn't Know It.” Ah, here we go. That's… very good.

MARISHA: Scotty doesn't know.

MATT: That's an AOL email waiting to happen. “Thanks for the show. Really, it's one of the bright points in my life right now.” That's awesome! Thank you for watching, buddy. G.E. Oden, 25 bucks. “Thanks for making Thursday nights the best day of my week. I happily support cast and Geek & Sundry crew. Obey your Overlord.”

MARISHA: (laughs)

MATT: We do.

TALIESIN: Yeah, we do.

LAURA: If you say so.

MATT: DressHawk, 30 bucks. “Every little helps, I hope.” And it does.

MARISHA: Yes.

ORION: It does.

MATT: And the 826 is going to get such a check from us.

LAURA: Yeah, oh my gosh.

MATT: WeeklyFactoids donated five bucks. “Another good week, Vox Machina. Travis, I still need the specs so I can start working on the cosplay. Also, Liam, the knife is done. I just have to finish Laura's bear statue. Less than three, a Critical Role cosplayer.”

LAURA: He made a bear statue?!

MATT: Apparently!

(all laugh)

ZAC: And all you got was a damn emote, right?

MATT: If someone ends up making a Sarenrae holy symbol for you…

TRAVIS: What's his name? Who's this?

MATT: WeeklyFactoids.

LIAM: WeeklyFactoids is the guy who bought eight shirts!

ZAC: Wait, technically it's WheelyFactoids.

LIAM: WheelyFactoids?

LAURA: Yeah, that's him. What, dude!

TRAVIS: I've got an axe. I'll show you.

MATT: That's awesome. Well done! Thank you so much. Timeout9288, 15 bucks. “Love you guys. My friends and I are totally starting D&D for the first time with your inspiration. Also, Travis Willingham, Gazlowe is one of my favorite Heroes of the Storm heroes.”

TRAVIS: Gazlowe? Yeah, he's really stupid.

MARISHA: You're Gazlowe?

TRAVIS: Yeah, I'm Gazlowe.

MARISHA: I didn't know that!

TRAVIS: He's the little goblin that could, you know.

MATT: He's not quite as good as Rehgar.

LAURA: Both of you, calm down.

MATT: And none of us are as good as Jaina or Illidan.

LAURA: Hold your peace.

LIAM: Don't fuck with grandpa Illidan, all right?

TRAVIS: He's got no plans later. That could be really cool.

MATT: That's so awesome. WoodyFoun donated a thousand dollars.

(all cheer loudly)

MATT: “Congratulations to you all on your tenth episode. I'm sure all fans will agree. I hope there will be many more shows to come. P.S.: Laura Bailey– insert harp accompaniment– can you please say, 'Eat lightsaber, jerk' "in your best Kira Carsen voice? Love all of you.”

TRAVIS: For a thousand bucks?

LAURA: For a thousand bucks, yeah. Now there's so much pressure.

(all laugh)

LIAM: What was it?

MATT: Eat lightsaber, jerk.

LAURA: Eat lightsaber, jerk. There.

LIAM: That is an amazing donation. Thank you so much.

ALL: Thank you!

MATT: Shomzer donated 25 bucks. “Slowly fell in love with everyone in this D&D group. Keep it up, guys. This is something I look forward to weekly and it's incredibly entertaining.”

ZAC: Was that negging?

MATT: Negging?

ZAC: Was that negging? “Slowly fell in love.”

MATT: Slowly fell in love. No!

SAM: No, that's good.

TALIESIN: Makes me want to work harder. That's all I'm saying.

ORION: He was just courting us at first.

LAURA: Yeah.

MATT: Yeah.

LAURA: But now he's in love.

MATT: To be fair, we're a bunch of weird folks on Twitch. It takes a little getting used to us.

LAURA: You're in a very fabulous purple coat right now.

MATT: I am.

ZAC: No, I like his style.

MATT: Thank you, guys.

SAM: I love my wife.

MATT: SeekerPentegan, I think it is. Ten dollars. "Started watching Critical Role because of Laura and Travis, stayed because you're all great. Thanks for brightening up my Friday mornings. I'm from Germany, so the stream starts at four am for me. It's totally worth it to get up so early for you guys.” That's amazing!

MARISHA: Christ, four am? Good morning!

TALIESIN: Good morning!

LIAM: Ah, tschüss!

SAM: Entschuldige. I don't know what that is.

LAURA: Danke schön. Did I say that right?

TALIESIN: Guten Morgen!

MARISHA: Guten Morgen!

LIAM: You said thank you, he said excuse me, he's saying good morning. I said see you later, see you next time, ta-ta.

LAURA: Oh, okay.

MATT: There you go.

MATT: e3kguru, $25. “Thanking Geek & Sundry for shows like Critical Role. To the cast, thanks for taking the time every week to bring us into your world. Much love to everyone and happy tenth episode.” Thank you so much.

ORION: Thank you!

MATT: Lukegoodatstuff, 20 bucks. “I didn't expect Critical Role to be my favorite show on the channel, but here we are. Less than three you all. It's been a fun ten episodes. Looking forward to many more.”

ALL: Yay!

MATT: Locomotive also donated $1,000–

(all cheer)

MATT: To 826LA charity. "Critical Role has been the most awesome show I've discovered on Twitch. Thank you for putting this together.” Thank you. That's incredible.

LIAM: The two of you are extremely generous. Thank you, and the charity's going to have their mind blown. And thank you everyone for supporting.

MATT: Yeah, we're going to get photos when we present them with the check and we're going to do a whole thing.

TALIESIN: Oh, if there's an 826 in your city, by the way, go check it out. Really, they have amazing stuff for sale. It's the best first date. It's great.

LAURA: They have the coolest stuff.

MARISHA: It's always so much fun.

LAURA: Yeah, we have a bunch of posters at our house.

TALIESIN: I've done so well taking girls to 826. I'm not even kidding.

MARISHA: It's true.

TALIESIN: It goes very well.

MARISHA: They've got great storefronts.

TALIESIN: They've got a pirate store, a superhero store. They have a time-travel store.

MARISHA: Spy store.

MATT: I do want a novelty check for when we finally get these donations over.

LAURA: That would be awesome.

MATT: We're going to draw pictures on it.

MARISHA: How much are those novelty checks?

SAM: A thousand dollars.

MATT: Arislan donated $50. That's awesome! “Happy tenth episode, hope you enjoyed your cake.” Aw, thank you guys!

LAURA: Thank you! I'm tweeting your cake right now!

MATT: “The only thing better is your support of 826LA and I hope my small contribution helps.” It really does. Thank you so much.

ORION: Yes, it does. Absolutely.

MATT: Splattercat, 25 bucks.

LIAM: Splattercat.

MATT: “Hey guys, day one subscriber. When I first heard about Critical Role it sounded too good to be true, and even after ten episodes it still kind of is. You guys are all awesome, and I will continue to support Critical Role and Geek & Sundry as long as we all exist.” As long as we all exist.

LIAM: Which should be for about one more episode.

TALIESIN: We're double-checking. It is still five hit points to splatter a cat.

MARISHA: Yeah, five hit points.

ORION: Really?

MARISHA: Thanks, splatterkitten.

TALIESIN: We established that. We did.

MATT: All right, aranax06, $20. “Thanks for your amazing performance.” Thank you for your amazing donation.

ALL: Thank you!

MATT: TristanDunman, five bucks. “Huge fan of Critical Role and just super inspired by all you talented actors. Starting my own group soon and using the power of my art to make it as awesome as possible. Thanks again, everyone. Tristan.” Thank you, Tristan.

TRAVIS: Thanks, Tristan.

ORION: Have fun!

MARISHA: The power of art!

MATT: And ridlich, ten dollars. “Subbed the first day I witnessed the awesomeness of Critical Role. Such a great channel. Starting a campaign this weekend with a thrown-weapon fighter inspired by Vax and his daggers. Keep up the great work.”

(all cheer)

MATT: Guys, that's amazing. Thank you so, so much.

LAURA: You're so amazing.

MARISHA: You're so cool!

ZAC: So we're going to switch over to the dropcam and some music really quick, and we're going to get set up for the Q&A as fast as possible for you guys.

MATT: Yeah.

ZAC: Stick around.

MATT: Hang out for a short time. We'll be right back.

ZAC: This is just a couple minutes and we will get set up.

MATT: Indeed. Thank you so much.

MARISHA: Dance!

ZAC: No, Q&A.

MARISHA: Well, we can dance while setting up for the Q&A.

TRAVIS: You can dance.

MATT: More than a thousand.

SAM: Yes.

MATT: You guys are amazing. I can't even.

LIAM: 1,034, presently.

TALIESIN: Oh my god.

LAURA: That's– yeah.

MARISHA: 1,034? Wow, that's huge.

ZAC: Lucas, did you switch over?

LAURA: He did.

LUCAS: I didn't.

[music]

MATT: All right, are we on? Hey, guys!

ORION: Hey, everybody.

MATT: Thank you so much for being ridiculous.

LAURA: So amazing!

MATT: We're glad you guys all tuned in, and are still tuning in to our show, let alone the support for the shirts. The support for the charity has been– I think I speak for all of us– unbelievable, and we're so blessed and excited that we have such amazing friends and viewers out there. You guys are the most amazing fanbase for any show I've ever had. So thank you. You guys earned this, most definitely. I'm willing to stay as long as we need. I know some people have families they've got to get back to.

SAM: Got ten minutes, tops.

TRAVIS: I feel like this is trying to read the Matrix, it goes so fast. “I want that jacket.”

MATT: How many shirts were sold by the end of it? Last I checked, we were at 1,032.

ZAC: Well, technically, we still have seven days.

TALIESIN: The Hawkeye? Hot Topic.

MATT: The shirts are still available for another week.

LAURA: How tall are you, Travis?

TRAVIS: Six-four.

LAURA: I saw that one.

TALIESIN: You're six-four?

ASHLEY: The same height as Abraham Lincoln.

MATT: It says, “pan main camera up.”

(all laugh)

LAURA: Oh, someone's asking about Keyleth's child murder.

MATT: It's saying the banner's cutting off heads in the back.

LIAM: Keyleth's, or Marisha's?

MARISHA: Well.

LAURA: Can you see our heads now?

TALIESIN: Dinner was great.

TRAVIS: Something about Tiberius's brother.

ZAC: Usually, if they say it, we've already noticed it.

MATT: Who wants to pick a question and run with it?

LAURA: Can we talk about Keyleth's child murdering?

MARISHA: (laughs)

TRAVIS: How did the kid die, Marisha?

TALIESIN: Yeah, tell them.

LAURA: This was sad.

MARISHA: God, I got asked this question at the panel over the weekend, too. It's a hot topic. Everyone wants to know how I killed the kid. Well, we were fighting– tell us about the fight.

MATT: Over the course of the first major arc of their campaign, every town they went to, there seemed to be this recurring theme of children disappearing, so they kept trying to follow this thread and asking around, and these kids kept vanishing, and the one common thread they were discovering was, shortly before each kid disappeared, they began playing with a new kid who had long black hair and golden eyes. And then they would disappear within a week of playing with that child. Towards the end of the campaign, during a celebration, after they managed to save the city of Emon, they looked over and found that the Sovereign Uriel's child was talking to this black-haired, golden-eyed child. So the party, in the middle of a platform, grandstand, bowing before the townspeople, they just pulled their weapons out and jumped off after this child, who grabbed the sovereign's son and pulled him into this pocket dimension. What it turned out to be was this entity, which is a variation of the Dread Emperor, for those who are familiar with that character. The Dread Emperor had created this pocket dimension world, this giant bramble forest that surrounded a gothic castle where it existed. This weird, messed-up individual brought children there because it loved to be around their innocence and their naivety, their sense of play.

MARISHA: So basically, a sorcerer Neverland Ranch.

MATT: Yeah. It was messed up. But once the children got too old, they were no longer useful, so he killed them and put them in a basement. So the party gave chase, they fought their way to the castle, and they discovered that what was dangerous about fighting this Dread Emperor in his library was it was wearing golden armor, and attached to this armor via four chains were four children by collars, and if anyone attacked him directly, he shared the damage he took with the children.

MARISHA: And we actually found these clippers for the chain.

LAURA: Big golden scissors, but we put them in our pocket and forgot that we had them.

MARISHA: We were like, “Sweet clippers. Pocket. Keep going.” And then we get to this emperor with these giant gold chains and we're like, “How do you break these gold chains? If only we had clippers. Oh, well, we don't.”

MATT: However, you guys started attacking the chains with your weapons, and you were doing enough damage during the first few rounds to save most of the kids.

LAURA: But there was one kid left.

MARISHA: So there was one. So we were trying to get these kids away from us because we don't want to hurt them, but we wanted them away, so I used a Grasping Vine, and I was trying to yank the kid away, but the Grasping Vine attached to the chain instead of the kid, so with the chain at the collar around his neck, when the vine yanked–

MATT: You broke the kid's neck.

LAURA: I thought you grabbed the kid's waist and he got pulled toward the thing, but the chain was still around his neck.

MATT: That's what happened. The vine wrapped around his body and it broke his neck because he was still attached.

MARISHA: Oh, that's right. I should have grabbed the chain, but instead–

MATT: You just grabbed the kid.

TRAVIS: Sam, what's it like being the sexiest member of the group?

SAM: Is that what one of the things was?

TRAVIS: Yep.

TALIESIN: We just want to know.

SAM: It's a lot like life.

(all laugh)

SAM: I've come to accept it. It's the hand I was dealt.

TRAVIS: Matt, how do you deal with writer's block, and when can we expect Trinket plushies?

MATT: Trinket plushies would be amazing. I would love to expect those at some point in the future.

TALIESIN: I want plushies for all of us.

LIAM: We could expect Trinket plushies. It might not be next week, but I feel like within 12 months, there will be a Trinket plushie.

MATT: I'd like that. That would be cool.

LAURA: If Trinket survives for 12 months.

MATT: As far as writer's block? Good music. I have a number of playlists, where if I'm having a problem, I just close my eyes and listen to good music. A lot of soundtracks. I find Elder Scrolls soundtrack is great. Stuff like that. Gets my mind going.

TRAVIS: How did the group come up with Vox Machina?

TALIESIN: Well…

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Oh, god. Do we really want to tell this story?

LIAM: How we came up with Vox Machina? Is that the question?

ZAC: They asked it!

LAURA: Yeah, our previous name.

SAM: We needed to come up with a name.

LIAM: We used to be the SHITs. We used to be the Super High Intensity Team, the SHITs.

TALIESIN: The SHITs.

ASHLEY: Which I'm still a fan of.

LAURA: I think it's awesome.

TRAVIS: Yeah, me, too. SHITs forever.

SAM: Some people didn't think that it was–

LAURA: Some people that are maybe druid and–

TRAVIS: Royalty.

SAM: So we had to come up with something less provocative.

TALIESIN: We tried to come up with something as we were slowly gaining esteem.

MARISHA: Hey, there was a few of us with family ties.

TALIESIN: We were all like, “Okay, perhaps we don't want to be known as the SHITs.”

MARISHA: Over here, as well, and over here.

TALIESIN: No, I was with you.

MARISHA: All these people with royal family ties.

TALIESIN: I have a family name. No.

MARISHA: Can't be a part of the SHITs. “What have you been doing for the last ten years, Keyleth?” “Well.”

TALIESIN: “I've been the SHITs.”

(all laugh)

MATT: Someone asked if the group would ever do Hot Pepper Gaming.

MATT AND TALIESIN: (laugh)

MATT: There are plans in place for most of us to partake. I don't know if everyone will, but some will.

MARISHA: Again.

TALIESIN: Quite a few.

MATT: Yeah, so that will be fun.

LIAM: Someone is asking what Matt whispered to me when I insight-checked Marisha. It's not what you think it is, and I'm not going to say.

LAURA AND ASHLEY: Ooh.

LAURA: I saw, what color is Trinket and what color is his armor? He's brown, and he's got silver armor.

TALIESIN: We accept fanfic as our personal savior.

LIAM: It's moving too fast.

TRAVIS: I saw, what level is everyone, and what is your alignment?

TALIESIN: Just became ten.

MARISHA: Ten.

MATT: Everyone's ten now, I think.

ASHLEY: I don't think I am yet, because I missed a lot of games.

TRAVIS: Alignments, starting with Liam.

LIAM: Chaotic good.

TRAVIS: Chaotic good. Tiberius?

ORION: Huh?

LIAM, MATT, AND TRAVIS: Your alignment.

MATT: It's a Q&A.

ORION: Yeah, I know. These guys were talking about stuff I know about, and I was responding to other people that were talking on Twitter.

TRAVIS: What's your alignment?

ORION: Chaotic good.

TRAVIS: (laughs)

LAURA: Oh, that makes sense.

MARISHA: Neutral good.

ASHLEY: I'm chaotic good.

TRAVIS: Percy?

TALIESIN: I believe neutral good.

TRAVIS: I'm chaotic neutral. Sam?

SAM: I think I'm neutral good.

LAURA: I'm neutral good.

ASHLEY: Wait, chaotic good? Does that make sense? Is that what I am?

LAURA: I don't think you're chaotic.

TRAVIS: “Is that what I am?”

MATT: (laughs) What is your alignment?

ASHLEY: What is my alignment?

MATT: You should look at your sheet.

SAM: I don't remember. I don't think it's on my sheet.

ORION: Can you just be good?

ASHLEY: It says chaotic good.

SAM: What should I be, Matt?

MATT: Okay. It's not so much required to be lawful, like the older editions are, but it depends on the deity you chose. I'm still keeping an eye on your actions in the game.

TALIESIN: There's so many. I'm trying to pick one.

MATT: That crack in your thing is still there.

ASHLEY: Wait, but maybe the crack would get healed because of my honesty roll.

SAM: Yeah, but that was a game thing. That wasn't a character thing.

LAURA: No, that was definitely a character thing.

LIAM: You've got a wicked streak.

ASHLEY: I've got a wicked streak, man.

MATT: We'll see how it plays out.

ASHLEY: (groans)

TALIESIN: This is like trying to catch snowflakes.

LIAM: On a related note, somebody wants you to say, “Fuck you, Dylan” for some reason.

ASHLEY: Fuck you, Dylan!

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: That was amazing, actually.

MATT: That was really good.

TRAVIS: That had a lot of conviction behind it.

MARISHA: (laughs)

TRAVIS: “Liam, scoot in. We can't see you.”

MATT: Come in, buddy.

LIAM: Aww.

ORION: Scootch.

MARISHA: Is that better?

LAURA: Now we're all nice and cozy.

LIAM: Tiberius is chaotic inattentive? It goes so fast!

LAURA: Wait a sec. “Hey, guys, love the stream.”

ZAC: They want to know how you all got into voice acting.

LIAM: Hooking.

TRAVIS: Virgin sacrifice.

MATT: That's a long question.

SAM: How does anyone do anything?

MARISHA: It's a long story.

MATT: Training to be an actor, and then pursuing the opportunities.

LIAM: And then you met the right person while training to be an actor.

TALIESIN: Acting with a desire for a bad haircut.

MARISHA: And the ability to work in your pajamas.

LAURA: I can't read this fast. It's too much.

SAM: A lot of stuff for Matt.

TRAVIS: Keyleth, do you have a holy symbol?

MARISHA: Who? Me?

TRAVIS: Do you have a holy symbol?

MARISHA: I don't have a holy symbol. Not a druid thing. I like the earth. I worship the earth. No deities.

LAURA: You can still trust Vex after Dread. I'm not the same girl.

MATT: Whole different character.

LAURA: Whole different character.

TRAVIS: Are any of you guys going to GenCon?

LIAM: When Geek & Sundry arranges that.

MARISHA: Yeah, tell Geek & Sundry to take us there.

LAURA: Yeah, we thought that would be fun.

ORION: Hit them up. Tell them you want us there.

SAM: I do not think I look like Tim Curry.

(all laugh)

LIAM: With the beard, you did.

MATT: Yeah, I can see that a little bit.

TRAVIS: That's a good one! Did any of you grow up shy?

LAURA: Yes.

MATT AND TALIESIN: No.

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: I was a ham.

TALIESIN: I was a working actor.

MATT: Oh, yeah, you were a child actor. You're like, “Oh, I was working with Spielberg when I was six.”

LAURA: You were a child actor, too.

LIAM: I was a spaz. I was so shy. I'm going to be blind as that manta ray by the time this Q&A is over!

MATT: As a note, guys. For those of you that have seen Mr. Mom?

TALIESIN: Oh, god.

MATT: The little kid with the woobie?

LIAM: The woobie. He's right over here.

TALIESIN: This is how everything goes wrong. This is what happens.

ASHLEY: I'm going to re-watch that.

LIAM: This goes right. We're playing D&D once a week! Any interest in turning Critical Role into a comic book? Yes. Who will draw it, from the chat room?

MATT: Yeah, that would be amazing. If anyone out there wants to make it a comic book, that would be great!

TRAVIS: Tiberius, would you say, “I encourage violence”?

ORION: When I want to.

LAURA: (gasps) I just saw one that said, “Laura, would you like a giant Trinket plushie to sit at the table with me?” And yes.

LIAM: Yeah.

LAURA: I would.

LIAM: Like an FAO Schwarz-size bear?

TALIESIN: She might actually cry.

LAURA: Dude, that would be amazing.

MATT: Someone asked, how did we all get into D&D? High school, for me.

TALIESIN: High school.

LIAM: High school.

LAURA: These guys.

TRAVIS: This.

MATT: For most everyone else, this.

SAM: This is my first time playing.

TRAVIS: Liam's birthday party.

LIAM: Either high school or my birthday two and a half years ago. It was my birthday request to play a one-off, and it turned into this.

MATT: Yeah. This is Liam's fault.

MARISHA: My first game was with you, but then I've done other games since and I came back for this one.

TALIESIN: I had played other games before you, but had never really experienced the sensation of playing D&D. This was a whole– there were levels that were reached that had never been reached before.

MARISHA: I've had some frustrating DMs, too.

MATT: It happens.

SAM: Who's the youngest?

LAURA: Who's the youngest?

LIAM: Not me.

TALIESIN: Not me.

LAURA: Marisha?

SAM: Probably Marisha. She's, like, 16.

LIAM: I'm the oldest.

MARISHA: In Los Angeles, there is no age, only age “rages.”

TRAVIS: “Age rages?”

MARISHA: Age rages.

TRAVIS AND TALIESIN: I would like to age rage.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: I would like to age rage.

SAM: I think I'm the oldest.

LIAM: No. I'm the oldest.

LAURA: Oh, my old brother.

LIAM: Light!

ORION: (laughs)

MARISHA: (sing-song) I will never tell.

ORION: Tiberius isn't old.

LIAM: No, I know that. You're an old soul. I'm May 28th, and you're when?

SAM: October 9th.

TALIESIN: Wait, how old are you?

SAM: 38.

TALIESIN: I'm 38!

SAM: When's your birthday?

TALIESIN: January 19th. I'm the oldest!

LIAM: What month?

TALIESIN: January.

MATT: Hold on.

MARISHA: I'm 18 to 30.

ORION: I don't care; I'll just keep going. Wizards who do magic, they have to pick it every day. Sorcerers invoke it. They learn it from their being and they cast it out that way. The character Tiberius, figuring him out, that predicted which way I went because I feel he would just have it within him to do. The whole thing is, he's the Keyser Söze of the group, in a way, where he's the false buffoon, but he knows exactly what he's doing when it comes to a battle and other particular things.

MATT: Yeah. Awesome.

TALIESIN: January 19th is an awesome birthday. Yes, thank you.

MATT: Question: “how do we send you shit?” Talk to Overlord.

TALIESIN: Probably in a bag.

LAURA: Don't send us shit.

MATT: Small boxes of shit.

ZAC: DM the Overlord!

ORION: (English accent) We don't want no poo.

MATT: DM the Overlord for where to send your boxes full of fecal matter.

ZAC: Thanks, Matt. Thanks so fucking much!

MATT: (laughs)

ZAC: That's all I need. They will send me fecal matter, and it's on you.

LIAM: I think someone asked about my birthday. Laura and my birthday. The whole reason we are playing twins is that we share the same birthday.

LAURA: We are twins!

LIAM: It's May 28th.

LAURA: What, what!

MARISHA: May birthdays!

LIAM: She's older than me, though.

LAURA: No, I'm not.

TALIESIN: I can't read this, it's actually hurting–

TRAVIS: I'm having a motherfucking aneurysm.

MARISHA: I know, you're going to get motion sick–

MATT: I know. Real fast, a note to all you guys, because Travis and Laura have a vacation planned in two weeks. Depending on where we are in the game, if the party's about to go in to fight K'Varn and then they have to leave the following week, we might actually take a week off and instead do a three-hour hangout and answer questions, and I might go over teaching people how to play the game, because we don't want to do a boss fight without two of our party. So just as a heads-up, that might be something that happens.

LAURA: Sorry, guys.

MATT: We'll figure it out.

ORION: Somebody wanted you to say something as Trey.

MATT: (laughs) As Trey?

ORION: Yeah. That's what these shirts are, by the way. These are from Type-0, the thing that we're in.

MATT: “I hope you've enjoyed your game tonight, and if you have any questions, please feel free to put them on the screen. Thank you.”

ORION: “Pay attention, yo.”

TALIESIN: I saw VentralMalcavian. I actually, in high school, played the Malcavian prince of Los Angeles. It was fabulous.

MARISHA: Oh, that's amazing.

TALIESIN: Malcavian all the way. It was magical.

MARISHA: That's awesome.

LIAM: I want to know the answer to one someone asked. “How did Travis and Laura meet?”

ALL: Aww.

LAURA: Adorable.

TRAVIS: Oh, back in Dallas. Like, right out of high school, we were in the same talent agency.

LAURA: We did a job as extras together on a set.

TRAVIS: With the silent extra talk.

[no audio]

LIAM: Were you good?

MARISHA: Oh, did you guys do that on camera? That's so cute.

LAURA: We sat for eight hours at the same table, and we couldn't talk to each other because we weren't allowed to make noise.

TRAVIS: We thought we were superstars.

LAURA: Yeah, we thought we were so cool.

TRAVIS: “This is the greatest job ever”.

LAURA: And then just started hanging out in the same circles, and that was that.

ASHLEY: The rest is history?

TRAVIS: She totally fell for me.

ORION: That's adorable.

MARISHA: It's adorable.

SAM: Someone asked many questions. “When did Pike and Scanlan start flirting?” Or, “When did Scanlan start flirting with Pike?” Right from the beginning.

TRAVIS: (laughing) Yeah, no joke.

LAURA: Yes, like literally the moment Pike was in the game.

SAM: Donatello's my favorite Ninja Turtle.

LIAM: Sam is my favorite Ninja Turtle.

ORION: Mine, too.

LAURA: Donatello is my favorite Ninja Turtle.

SAM: Advice for bards is sing loud, and sing proud. Or play your flute or whatever.

LIAM: That's more commonly known as “rock out with your cock out.”

TALIESIN: Someone now asked how you two met, now, too.

MARISHA: People are now asking how we met.

SAM: Bard out with your heart out.

ORION: Bard out with your heart out.

MATT: Me and Marisha met– a mutual friend of ours was putting together a sketch-writing group– this was years ago.

MARISHA: It was supposed to be SNL, but geeky, nerdy stuff where we were going to write and perform our own sketches.

MATT: Those never pan out.

MARISHA: That never happened.

MATT: Not in L.A.

MARISHA: Yeah.

TALIESIN: (laughs)

MATT: But we met there, we harbored secret crushes for about a year, and then when we reconnected a little over a year later, I was out of a relationship, and she was just getting out of one, and we both started talking again. And then eventually we were like, “Hey, this is cool. We should do this.”

MARISHA: You got me an audition for Resident Evil.

MATT: Yeah.

MARISHA: And then I was like, “I owe you a drink.”

LAURA: Is that the Resident Evil we worked on together?

TALIESIN: He was adorable. It was so adorable watching him. Oh, god.

MATT: It was for Damnation, the CG movie.

LAURA: Oh, okay. I did that, too.

MATT: Yeah.

MARISHA: Yeah.

TALIESIN: Back when we had a karaoke bar that we went to. I miss our karaoke bar.

TRAVIS: Do you ever want to be a player and not a DM?

MATT: I do. It doesn't happen often. At all. But that's okay.

TALIESIN: He's so good!

MATT: I'll have the opportunity.

LIAM: “Will Critical Role continue after the boss?” Yes.

LAURA: Yeah!

MATT AND TALIESIN: Oh, yeah.

SAM: No! We're all going to die!

MATT: (laughs)

TRAVIS: “Zac, what was the most recent picture you shared with the community?” Somebody is asking to see it. Or asking me to ask you to see it.

ZAC: Oh, I'll show you later. It's inappropriate.

SAM: Oh, yes, guys, by the way. Ashley and I are dating in real life.

ORION: Do they ship you?

SAM: Yeah, no, we've been together for a couple of years now.

TRAVIS: Yeah, like, 40 years.

ASHLEY: 40-something years now.

TALIESIN: On and off.

SAM: It feels like it.

TALIESIN: On and off.

ASHLEY: On and off.

TALIESIN: Drama. Just drama.

ASHLEY: It's a long time. You lose track–

LIAM: If you replace Ashley with Liam, it's true.

TRAVIS: “Pike, does Scanlan have a shot?”

ASHLEY: I don't know; we'll see.

MATT: “Do you guys have backup characters rolled for when you get TPK'd?”

SAM: “We'll see?” Come on, give me a hint!

LIAM: I've got an idea.

LAURA: Aw, I saw, how did me and Trinket become friends?

TALIESIN: That's dark, people! That's really dark!

LIAM: That's a good one!

TRAVIS: How did you and Trinket become friends?

LAURA: Okay, it's kind of a long story.

LIAM: Yeah, go for it.

MARISHA: Wait, you and Trinket?

LAURA: Me and Trinket.

MARISHA: Yeah, I want to hear it.

LAURA: I sent this short story to Matt– what was it, a year ago? I just wanted him to know why Trinket was so special to me. It's such a dorky thing.

LIAM: It really is a short story and not a blurb. It was long.

LAURA: It was a long thing. And it was all about, shortly after me and my brother left our family of the elves and we were setting off on our own and he was off in the city and I was making camp outside of town, these people came into the camp and basically I trusted them too much, they kidnapped me and brought me back to their camp. And they were poachers on the black market. And I was in a cage and I could hear a large creature in pain, and through my own wiles I got out of the cage, took out the two hunters, and I went to see what animal it was, and it was a giant bear in a lot of pain. Unfortunately, it had been cut open from the middle, they had been harvesting the bear but they hadn't killed it, and it was really sad, so I felt terrible for it, and I put it out of its misery and felt really bad about it. And then I heard off to the side, a small animal make noise, and I realized it was its cub.

ALL: No!

LAURA: So I took the cub and I felt really horrible, and that was also my first time I'd ever killed any people, as well, so Trinket was very special to me because I wanted to protect him and not let him experience that again.

ASHLEY: Trinket.

TRAVIS: Did you eat the cub?

LAURA: I didn't eat the cub! I saved the cub!

TRAVIS: Oh, the cub is Trinket.

LAURA: And I have never even told anybody about that. I never told Vax about that, or anything. So Trinket was mine.

ALL: Aw.

MATT: That's really cute.

MARISHA: Trinket.

LAURA: Yeah.

TALIESIN: Bear love.

ORION: Also adorable.

ASHLEY: Trinket!

TALIESIN: Someone mentioned we should bring Jennifer Hale on the show as a guest.

LAURA: Ooh, she'd be pretty great.

TALIESIN: That would be hot.

MATT: That would be interesting.

LIAM: There's a short list for guests, and a long lists for guests, for down the road.

MATT: Yeah, we're going to have some fun people jumping in for a few weeks here and there.

SAM: George Clooney, anybody?

LIAM: Carrot Top.

SAM AND LAURA: Carrot Top, anybody?

ASHLEY: Why do I have food in my hair?

MATT: Because you're doing it right!

ASHLEY: Anyway, who would you guys like to see play D&D with us?

LAURA: Oh, yeah.

TRAVIS: There we go, watch this thing light up.

TALIESIN: Yeah, that's a good question.

LAURA: I'm seeing that “expect a crochet Trinket.” I appreciate that. Thank you.

SAM: Let's wait two minutes until the feed catches up.

TALIESIN: Ashly Burch.

LAURA AND TRAVIS: Stephen Colbert.

LAURA: Barack Obama!

TRAVIS AND LIAM: Barack Obama.

ASHLEY: I don't know if we can get Barack Obama, you guys.

TALIESIN: I don't know if we can get Ashly Burch. That's tough.

SAM: Oh, not the president Barack Obama, some other guy.

TALIESIN: George Takei!

LAURA: Wil Wheaton.

TALIESIN: Steve Blum, Troy Baker.

LAURA: Tom Hiddleston.

LIAM: Tim Burton?

TALIESIN: Vin Diesel.

ORION: (laughs) Tim Burton?

MATT: I love Vin Diesel.

MARISHA: Hardwick. Vin Diesel!

MATT: We're working on Hardwick.

LIAM: My eyes are bleeding!

TALIESIN: Claudia Black.

LAURA: So many!

SAM: (deep voice) Jon Snow!

LIAM: Eliza Dushku.

TRAVIS: There's a Laura emote!

LIAM: Elijah Wood.

LAURA: There is?! There's a me emote?

MATT: A lot of the people you guys have mentioned, we're actually talking to. I'm going to talk to Nathan, I'm going to talk to Chris–

LAURA: We're talking to Vin Diesel.

SAM: Garfunkel and Oates, yeah.

MATT: We don't know if they're available.

TALIESIN: Garfunkel and Oates would be amazing.

MARISHA: That would be hilarious.

ASHLEY: That would be great.

SAM: Bards. They could be bards!

MATT: Dame Judy Dench? Yeah.

MARISHA: Steve Blum.

SAM: Troy Baker? I don't know.

LAURA: Who is that?

SAM: Sasha Gray.

LIAM: Pfft.

SAM: Troy Baker.

ASHLEY: Sasha Gray?

TALIESIN: I'd play with them. That'd be awesome.

ASHLEY: Sasha Gray is a…?

SAM: Porn star, yeah.

LIAM: Troy didn't know what to make of this when we first started it.

MATT: Yeah. I think he still doesn't to know what to make of it.

LAURA: Actually, no, you know what, I've had conversations with Troy about it–

TALIESIN: Peter Dinklage.

ASHLEY: Peter Dinklage is on my hall pass list.

LAURA: I don't think he'd be opposed to joining the game.

MATT: Really?

LAURA: Yeah, he seemed very interested when he brought it up.

TALIESIN: Sir Ian McKellen.

MATT: Because my first conversation with him about it was very brief and very much like, “Cool.” I was like, “Okay…”

LAURA: I think because me and Travis were so excited about it–

MATT: Probably.

LAURA: It grew on him.

MATT: Yeah, we'll drag him in it sometime.

LAURA: Yeah.

TALIESIN: Wow, this is an amazing–

LAURA: Matt Oswalt, that would be such a fun guest!

MATT: Danny Sexbang, yeah.

MARISHA: Eminem.

TRAVIS: If Grog comes across his uncle, yes, he would definitely want to kill him.

ASHLEY: Yeah.

MARISHA: Yeah.

TRAVIS: Bad relationship.

TALIESIN: You've had a little–

MARISHA: We've had a run-in, once–

TALIESIN: We've had a run-in with the family once–

TRAVIS: With his son, yeah. My cousin.

TALIESIN: Yeah. That was the only time you actually–

TRAVIS: Let him go?

TALIESIN: Deflated a conflict.

TRAVIS: Yeah, well.

MATT: Yeah, you stopped the fight.

TRAVIS: My childhood affection was the only thing that let him live.

MATT: It was amazing.

TRAVIS: But if we see him again, maybe a different outcome.

SAM: Hey, I have a question. I have a question for the DM. Is there a spell or a portal or anything out there where we can all switch bodies with each other? And I'm Keyleth for a while, and Taliesin is Grog for a while?

LIAM: What is this, an anime episode?

SAM: I don't know, it could be cool!

MATT: (laughs) There are artifacts that can do similar effects, yes.

LAURA: What?

SAM: I want to do that.

MATT: Like soul transfers and stuff like that.

LAURA: That just seems messed up.

MARISHA: Soul transfers?

TALIESIN: So would I be Grog, then?

MARISHA: No.

SAM: You would rage.

TALIESIN: It would just be me as Grog.

LIAM: Someone requested as a player, Zac Eubank.

SAM: I've heard of him.

ASHLEY: Yeah.

MATT: Probably try that guy in something.

LIAM: Zac, did you type that?

ZAC: I would really hate to steal the show, guys.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: I don't think I've seen you stand up so fast.

TALIESIN: We could have some kind of Freaky Friday.

MATT: Oh, this is a good question. “What if a party member dies? Do we have to scratch out the name on the shirt?”

SAM: You could buy a new shirt.

MATT: You're welcome to. It's a possibility. There are magics that can, through challenge, reverse death, but death is definitely a possibility and permanent death is definitely a possibility.

LIAM: Somebody's going to die eventually.

MATT: It's probably going to happen.

TRAVIS: Why are you asking the DM? Don't put ideas in his head.

ASHLEY: It's possible that will happen.

LIAM: But if it does happen, it's your fault.

SAM: That's a season two thing.

ASHLEY: This time around. When we fight K'Varn.

TALIESIN: That makes the t-shirt extra special.

LAURA: Ooh, what are Lady Kima's and Clarota's alignments? Can we know that?

MATT: What's what?

LAURA: What are Lady Kima's and Clarota's alignments?

MATT: You don't know that.

LAURA: We don't know that.

MATT: You have no clue what their alignments are.

TALIESIN: I'm down for that.

MARISHA: Has anyone permanently died at any point?

TALIESIN: Not in this game.

SAM: Permanently?

TRAVIS: In this campaign.

MATT: Nearly. Ashley almost died permanently.

SAM: Some of us have been in comas every other session.

ASHLEY: Hey, there is an emote Laura!

LIAM: Throw up the Laura emote, if there is one.

SAM: How do I get an emote?

LIAM: Is there a spirit in the room? Make it known if you're there.

SAM: What's the weirdest thing Grog's ever done as a character? Troll dick stuff… No, wait! He went and humped a fairy in another–

TRAVIS: You don't know what happened when I went through the portal!

SAM: Yeah, what happened up there?

ORION: Yeah, we don't know what happened.

TRAVIS: A barbarian never kisses and tells.

TALIESIN: What about all the other stuff you probably did? Will you tell us about that?

TRAVIS: We did summon a pony and chop its head off.

SAM: That was fun.

TRAVIS: And smeared its gore all over us.

LAURA: You also collected lots of dried poo and put it in the Bag of Holding.

TRAVIS: We had a dried poo chunk.

SAM: We used dried poo to blind the king a few episodes ago.

TALIESIN: You rage-looted. The rage-looting was pretty much the most disgraceful thing I've ever seen.

LAURA: Yeah, the rage-looting.

TRAVIS: Disgraceful or amazing?

MARISHA: That got us in a lot of trouble.

ORION: We accidentally killed the ox, right, because we stuffed it in the Bag?

TALIESIN: He felt guilty for weeks after. He felt genuinely bad about it.

TRAVIS: Minutes after.

MARISHA: Oh, there was also the time you slapped Trinket on the ass and I think you were sleeping on the couch that night.

TRAVIS: That was pretty bad.

TALIESIN: (laughs)

LAURA: (gasps) We were going through this thing. There were traps everywhere– electrical traps, everywhere. And all of us were being really cautious, and Grog hits Trinket on the butt with the blunt of his axe and sends Trinket running through the thing.

TRAVIS: He needed to be motivated!

LAURA: And he just hit every trap on the way through and almost died.

ASHLEY: Oh, Trinket.

TRAVIS: He was a little clumsy, but he got through, didn't he?

MATT: Yeah.

TRAVIS: Yeah? And then I slept on the couch for two nights.

(all laugh)

TRAVIS: I was in big trouble.

TALIESIN: Erika Ishii, Yuri Lowenthal.

MATT: Yeah, Yuri's probably going to come in at some point soon.

LAURA: He guested before we had the show. He came in our game.

MATT: Yeah, he guested once before the show.

SAM: He did?

MATT: As Ghost Fist, the dwarven monk.

LAURA: You weren't there. That was probably a night you were gone somewhere.

TRAVIS: Tiefling? What's a tiefling?

TALIESIN: Tieflings are like horned, pseudo-demonic–

LIAM: We haven't encountered any tieflings yet.

MARISHA: Demon blood.

TALIESIN: They're playables.

LAURA: That's what I want to be if I die. I want to roll as a tiefling.

TALIESIN: That would be awesome.

MATT: You guys have seen them, but they're very rare in this setting. At least in this part of the world, tieflings are super rare. You haven't encountered them much yet. Yet.

LIAM: Matt, someone's asking what's good to roll as if you are brand new to the game.

MATT: If you're brand new to the game?

LIAM: Fighter?

MATT: Fighter's pretty easy. I personally would say paladin or ranger are fun because you can taste a little bit of magic but you're also combat-based. It's a nice introduction to how all things work, and the magic is a slow build. You don't get it immediately, so at level one, you're just a melee guy– or combat guy– and eventually, you start getting abilities. I think the hybrid classes are good for that.

TALIESIN: Someone asked about Percy. Percy doesn't know if his sister died and Percy doesn't have a plan for his family because right now Percy is scared shitless of everything going on in the north, so no. No.

MATT: Someone else asked before, how often do players interact with their personal stories? Occasionally. There hasn't been much room for that since everyone's been underground for this entire run, but there are personal stories happening in the world and I'm sure they will come up as things progress, as well. They have in the past, and they're going to again.

LIAM: Someone asked, for fan art, do we want the characters to look like us? I think how we really look. I think either would be fine. A lot of the stuff that's coming in is based on the artwork of a woman named Kit Buss. She took input from us on what we were looking for, and she did the initial art and people have riffed off that, which is great.

MATT: They're incredible.

LIAM: If you want to make a dragonborn that looks like Orion with his face pulled out, that's cool, too.

MARISHA: Yeah, it's your interpretation.

SAM: If you want to put my face on every character, that's cool.

MARISHA: We want to see different interpretations.

MATT: That was a great photoshop.

LAURA: Somebody did do that.

TALIESIN: Someone did actually do that. That was really weird.

MATT: I think Kit's artwork, we're using as the basis of the official art, but you're welcome to create whatever you want going forward.

LAURA: Kit's really talented.

LIAM: Could someone draw Scanlan with the illusionary growth and the illusionary wang?

LAURA: The illusionary giant weird nipple?

SAM: Third purple nipple?

LIAM: Yes.

SAM: And the donkey dong?

LIAM: I mean, the donkey dong could be in pants or something. It doesn't have to be pornographic.

LAURA: This makes me uncomfortable.

MATT: Yeah.

TALIESIN: There's just so much to read.

MATT: Do you write a synopsis for previous ventures? Actually, the synopsis for each episode is on the Geek & Sundry website underneath the episodes, so it'll tell you what happens in that episode underneath. Just go to geekandsundry.com. He writes them all.

LIAM: Go to Geek & Sundry, then click on shows, then click on Critical Role, and that'll get you there.

LAURA: It's geekandsundry.com/shows/critical-role.

LIAM: It's as easy as that.

MATT: Yeah. So simple.

TRAVIS: I think this might have been covered, but how did the campaign start?

MATT: His birthday.

LIAM: Yeah, for my birthday I said I wanted to play D&D for a night and I asked the people that I wanted, and they came, and then the next day I sent out an email going, “Oh man, that was so great. I feel like we should do that again.” And nobody responded for a day, and I felt ashamed and sad because I thought that I was a dork and nobody wanted to do it, but then slowly, everyone trickled in going, “Yeah, yeah, yeah.” And here we are.

MARISHA: Oh, really? I didn't know you felt–

LIAM: Yep. For a day, I was like, “Oh, god. I just outed myself as the biggest dork in the group.”

MARISHA, LAURA, AND MATT: Aw.

TRAVIS: Is Trinket's intelligence higher than Grog's?

LIAM: Yes.

LAURA: No.

MATT: No.

TRAVIS: No. Okay? It's not.

LAURA: I think his intelligence is a four, so he's two points lower than you.

TRAVIS: Yeah, suck it.

LIAM: That's very close.

ASHLEY: Best and worst D&D memories. I can only read that because it's in all caps.

TRAVIS: Best and worst?

MATT: Best and worst D&D memories.

SAM: Our six-hour games were pretty bad.

TRAVIS: (laughs)

SAM: No, I love this.

LAURA: Dude, they were like eight hours.

MARISHA: How much do you write and how much do you improv? I mean, someone said, how much do we write and how much do we improv? Everything the players do is improv.

MATT: Yeah, there's no pre-planning.

LIAM: Matt's writing plot points, but he's improvising, too, and we have no idea what the hell's going to happen.

SAM: I write all my songs from scratch.

(all laugh)

ORION: Every day he comes in. Two hours, just writing songs.

TRAVIS: Does your full name fit into a tweet?

TALIESIN: I have been specifically not tweeting my full name yet.

LAURA: Why?

TRAVIS: Don't let them have it.

TALIESIN: I've been really enjoying watching people attempt to figure out what it is. Right now, Percy's in a hole underground, so it's not his favorite place to be.

TRAVIS: (laughs)

TALIESIN: Once I'm actually in a place to try and impress people, I'll be saying my name more.

TRAVIS: Did you ever consider doing a longer episode?

LIAM: I don't know. Do you guys want to watch for five hours?

LAURA: I know, that seems a bit much for you guys.

MARISHA: We used to play for eight hours.

LAURA: We used to play for eight hours!

MATT: Someone asked why do I treat ones as regular failures instead of flops? Because I run my campaigns pretty hard, and I think if 1s were critical fails the classic way, we would have TPK'd by now.

TRAVIS: What's that?

MATT, SAM, AND ORION: Total party kill.

MATT: Because in some rule sets, when you roll a one, it's a serious– I like treating it as no matter what you're doing, you fail, regardless. No matter what your bonus is, you fail. I think that's enough. In old campaigns I used to run, if you rolled a one attacking somebody, your weapon would go flying across the room and you'd fall on the ground. Or if you were trying to lift a boulder, the boulder would fall and crush you and you're dead.

TALIESIN: Yeah, I like the way you treat it.

MATT: Which can be fun for certain games, but for this–

TRAVIS: Why do you want us to die? What a shitty question.

MATT: For this, there's enough challenge where I think we don't need any more reasons. If it's funny and it makes sense– if it's a difficult challenge and you roll a one, there might be some drawbacks to a failure in that case, but I don't think it's a consistent thing I need to do.

MARISHA: People are saying to make them longer.

LIAM: Sam, I saw a question wondering when you're going to make a Weird Al Yankovic-esque compilation of songs.

SAM: (laughs)

LIAM: Next month?

SAM: Yeah, pretty soon. I'm working on an album.

ORION: We're going to be in the studio.

SAM: Yeah, we'll be in the studio.

TALIESIN: Scanlan at Sunset, coming soon.

SAM: It's just me changing the words to contemporary songs, but making them about Dungeons & Dragons, and I'll grow my hair like Weird Al.

LAURA: There was one time, for a 1, that it was a really funny bad fail, and that was when we were fighting the Dread Emperor.

ASHLEY: Oh, and you went through–

TALIESIN: Through the stained-glass window.

LAURA: And Scanlan was trying to get the final blow, and he rolled a one.

ASHLEY: That's one of my favorite moments.

LAURA: And the Dread Emperor literally side-stepped him and Scanlan fell out of a window.

TRAVIS: He lunged and– tell them.

MATT: Yeah, so the Dread Emperor had maybe three or four hit points left. People were hurt on the ground. It was this epic confrontation.

LAURA: We were dying.

TRAVIS: Scanlan's never killed anything.

MATT: Yeah, he's never killed anything. He pulls out his blade and just goes for an attack and we're all like, “Yes, go!”

LAURA: “Go, Scanlan!”

MATT: And he rolls a one, and it's him charging towards him, blade in the air.

SAM: (quiet war cry)

MATT: “You son of a bitch!” Running. Dread Emperor just side-steps. Scanlan goes flying–

LIAM: Nothing but net.

MATT: Loses his balance, crashes through a three-story-high stained-glass window in the back end of this library, out into a bramble bush, with all the glass tumbling onto him and is like, “Ow.”

TRAVIS: (laughs)

MATT: On the ground.

ASHLEY: It was one of the funniest moments that we had.

LAURA: It was really amazing.

MATT: It was pretty great.

TALIESIN: It was amazing.

ASHLEY: I was crying, I was laughing so hard.

ORION: No Holds Bard. That's the name of your album.

ALL: Oh!

SAM: No Holds Bard. That's good.

MATT: No Holds Bard. I like that.

LIAM: Ashley. Scanlan or Steve Rogers?

ASHLEY: Oh, man.

SAM: Or Mr. Rogers?

ASHLEY: That's a really hard choice. Mr. Rogers, for sure. I love Mr. Rogers.

TRAVIS: When are you guys going to do a drunk episode?

TALIESIN: Have we not done a drunk episode?

MARISHA: A drunk episode?

MATT: Someone asked, do I fudge my rolls? No, because at that point it becomes too weird. If you don't stick to at least what roll is there, then you lose the essence of fate, and I think that's what makes it fun for me. It makes it scary because then I don't know what's going to happen.

LIAM: Scanlan has fudged a bedroll.

SAM: I rolled the fudge.

MARISHA: Question. Worst possible enemy to fight? Probably a beholder.

LAURA: A beholder.

TALIESIN: A beholder, I would imagine, is the worst.

MATT: (laughs)

SAM: We'll find out. Maybe he'll be super easy.

ORION: I don't know if you guys noticed, who's been watching this whole time we've been playing, I generally do random chaotic things to be quirky and funny just because I like to, but this is the first time I was scared. I really freaked out with the confirmation it's a fucking beholder. It's terrible.

TRAVIS: You looked excited.

LAURA: Yeah, you did look excited. I think you were excited that you thought it might be a beholder, and then it was.

ORION: Yeah, and then I was terrified.

MATT: It's going to be fun.

ORION: It was a deluge of terror after that.

MARISHA: Someone asked how the party met in-game. That's a good question.

LAURA: Oh, that's a good question.

TALIESIN: You guys found me in a basement.

LAURA: Yeah! We saved you.

TALIESIN: Yeah, I had been arrested.

MATT: The very first game we played, you all had come together as individual mercenaries in the city of Stillben, which is a swamp town on the far eastern side of this continent. You all, for your own reasons, had come there because you needed money, you were trying to establish some way of making your skills useful, and there was a job board, and all of you came together in a tavern, saw there was a posting, and you decided to combine forces and try it out. That's how that started. And then they met Percy along the way. In a prison in the Umbra Hills.

TALIESIN: We've never really discussed what I was doing down there.

LAURA: Yeah, I would like to know.

TALIESIN: That's a story for another time.

TRAVIS: So why did Scanlan take a dump on that guest room bed?

MATT: Yeah, Scanlan.

ORION: He's kooky.

SAM: You'll find out when that guy gets to his room.

(all laugh)

SAM: And just… has the worst day.

LAURA: (laughs)

TRAVIS: (laughing) Has the worst day.

LIAM: We probably talked about this in the last Q&A, but I'm sure there's a lot of new people here. They want to know about Pike's death.

MARISHA: Yeah.

LAURA: (fake cries)

MARISHA: It was so sad.

LAURA: It was so sad.

LIAM: Keyleth looked at her and thought she was a kid, and then–

MATT AND MARISHA: (laugh)

MARISHA: And I was just like, “I hate kids!” (pshh)

MATT: I'll try to make it quick. In what was the final boss battle for the first arc, they were going towards the center of the city because a glabrezu, a treachery demon, had infiltrated the Sovereign Uriel, the king of the area, and his family. Filled their bodies with shades as opposed to their souls. They managed to recover the family, but they got into a conflict with the glabrezu, and as the fight was ensuing, Pike got too close, the glabrezu took a swipe at her, and rolled a critical hit, and did enough damage to bring her to death instantly. So mid-fight, went down. The whole party froze.

ASHLEY: I had already taken some hits, and then I realized at a certain point, because in the Pathfinder edition, if you're negative–

MATT: Your constitution score.

ASHLEY: Your constitution, and then I wasn't keeping track, and I looked down and it was way past my constitution, and I was like, “Oh, Matt? So what does it mean if you're this?” The look that he gave me, he was like, “Oh.” And he just paused because he was like, “Oh, that. You're dead.”

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: He was trying to figure out a way to say it.

MATT: It was awful.

ASHLEY: And I instantly started crying. I was like, “No! No no no!”

TRAVIS: There's a video of it.

LAURA: All of us are crying.

ASHLEY: It was horrible!

TRAVIS: You went under the table.

MARISHA: It's on Liam's Vine. If you go find Liam's Vine, there's a five-second clip of all of us just screaming bloody murder.

MATT: It wasn't just like she fell and died. The glabrezu has giant pincers. Grabbed her by the torso, lifted her up, and then snapped her in half, essentially.

MARISHA: Yeah.

LAURA: It was terrible.

MATT: And they had to recover both halves of her.

TALIESIN: How long ago was that?

MATT: That was over a year ago.

ORION: It was a year, yeah.

MARISHA: I remember you saying you'd had a bad week, too.

MATT: No, it wasn't a year. Almost a year.

ASHLEY: I did.

LAURA: You were on your way out the door, and then we talked you into staying for a little longer because we were getting into the fight and you were like, “Okay, I'll stay.”

ASHLEY: I was like, “I'll stay.”

LAURA: And then she died.

MARISHA: That's right, you were going to go somewhere.

ASHLEY: “In case anybody gets hurt.”

MARISHA: Oh, that's right, because didn't you have guests? You had people who were visiting you and you went back and you're like, “(cries) You don't understand.”

MATT: I definitely have ideas to keep the campaign going past level 20 and to epic or mythic stages. I would like to, if it goes that long. We shall see.

SAM: What happens at level 20?

MARISHA: We start killing gods.

ORION: There was a question for everybody. You cannot pick yourself. Which is your favorite character?

LAURA: Oh, what's our– ooh, that's a tough one.

LIAM: Outside of ourselves.

ASHLEY: I would pick Grog or Scanlan, but also rogues. The damage that you can do is so crazy.

TRAVIS: I pick Mercer. Nobody else can take it.

MATT: I'm not a character.

TRAVIS: You're many characters.

MATT: Well, that's cheating.

TRAVIS: Is it?

LIAM: Oh, it's so hard.

LAURA: That's so hard. I love everyone.

TALIESIN: I think Laura's actually my favorite character.

LAURA: Really?

TALIESIN: You have these very interesting emotional reactions to things that I find really entertaining from my side of the table.

LIAM: Scanlan is really hard to beat for laughs, but Tiberius is so quirky. I love that. I love how klutzy Keyleth is, with raw power at the same time. I'm very partial to my twin.

LAURA: Oh.

TALIESIN: Aw.

LIAM: Trinket is pretty great.

LAURA: Trinket is the bomb.

LIAM: It's hard to pick.

MARISHA: It's hard to pick. I don't know. I have a soft spot for Grog.

TRAVIS: Oh, Keyleth.

ORION: I agree. I would like to do the complete opposite of Tiberius with rage, and just tear shit apart with my teeth.

MARISHA: I like Percy, too. I'm not going to lie.

TALIESIN: Aw.

LAURA: Yeah, everybody's great.

MARISHA: Percy as a character.

LAURA: I don't have as much fun playing if Sam's not there because Scanlan is such a funny, fun character, and your ideas for things. Even right from where we first started playing, the things that you came up with to–

TALIESIN: Burt Reynolds.

LAURA: Yeah! Burt Reynolds.

TRAVIS: Fucking Burt Reynolds.

SAM: He's coming back soon.

LAURA: All these different things that you would do, it's just so different.

TRAVIS: Burt Reynolds, the customs officer.

TALIESIN: With the badge.

MATT: That's one of my favorite deterrents. You avoided essentially what would have been a throwdown with the entire thieves' guild of Emon by bluffing your way–

MARISHA: Finger mustache.

MATT: By pulling out a silver star–

LAURA: And a fake mustache.

MATT: And convincing them that you were part of the customs department.

ORION: Pike would be super fun to play, too, because clerics are crazy.

MARISHA: Yeah, Pike's great.

TALIESIN: You're really the heart of the group. We don't pretend that losing you wouldn't have broken us into tiny little pieces.

MATT: Gilmore.

SAM: Gilmore!

MATT: You guys haven't met Gilmore yet.

LAURA: Oh my god, you guys are going to love him.

SAM: I can't wait.

TALIESIN: You haven't met Gilmore!

MARISHA: They haven't met Gilmore.

SAM: What is it, Gilmore's Glorious Goods?

MARISHA AND LAURA: Gilmore's Glorious Goods.

TRAVIS: We haven't been to Gilmore's?

LAURA: No, not since the show started.

MATT: They haven't seen Emon yet.

ASHLEY: Another really special thing that we've done is that during Christmas time–

SAM: Oh, yeah! There's a Christmas episode.

ASHLEY: We always have specials, or winter's fest.

TALIESIN: We get to do a Christmas special online this year!

ASHLEY: And we always give each other presents from our characters. And it's probably my favorite thing, ever.

TALIESIN: It is so amazing.

ASHLEY: It's so amazing.

MARISHA: We come in Christmas pajamas.

ASHLEY: The first Christmas, Grog gave me two pine cone earrings.

LAURA: Literally pine cones. It was street.

TRAVIS: They were pine cones.

MARISHA: I still have the pine cones you gave me.

TALIESIN: I still have the bag of leftover IKEA crap.

MATT: That's a good question, which Laura should answer. What kind of dice do you all use, and what do you do with bad dice?

ORION: (laughs)

MARISHA: Oh, I love your dice thing.

ASHLEY: I currently want to burn my dice.

LAURA: Yeah, you should.

ASHLEY: Because I've been rolling like a–

TRAVIS: You had a good initiative.

LAURA: I've told you the last five games to get rid of your dice.

ASHLEY: I know you have.

LAURA: Because that's what I do. If I roll with a–

TRAVIS: Yeah, you are fickle on your dice, though. Come on.

LAURA: I am fickle. If I roll a one, it's gone for the game. I won't roll it again. But if it rolls bad more than three times, it's out. It's gone.

ORION: It's done.

MARISHA: You have a dice graveyard.

LAURA: There is a dice graveyard, and I spent a lot of money on these really beautiful amethyst dice.

ORION: And they're garbage now.

MARISHA: You should auction them. You should auction all your graveyard dice.

LAURA: I should!

ORION: No! They're cursed.

LAURA: That's true. But they're beautiful.

TALIESIN: They're worth more money because they're cursed.

ORION: Oh, you could buy cursed die, which is now a mystical item.

LIAM: Guys, there is no god, and it is the cold, random chance of the universe.

ORION AND MATT: (crack up)

ASHLEY: Only cold, random chance of what?

LIAM: Of the universe.

LAURA: No, because some people roll bad. Some dice roll bad.

LIAM: There's no magic dice.

TALIESIN: There is only one god, and it is–

TALIESIN AND MATT: The Dice God.

MARISHA: The Dice God!

TALIESIN: He is cruel and painful.

ORION: That is true. When it comes to dice.

ASHLEY: Just, on principle, I can't buy new dice because I'm like, “it's not the dice.”

LAURA: It is the dice!

LIAM: It's chance.

TALIESIN: You got a cool custom die.

MARISHA: I did get a custom die.

TALIESIN: She's got a custom die, and it's awesome.

ORION: I'd pay for cursed dice, so we're good.

SAM: Oh my god. That's daunting.

MATT: I did see a question someone asked. Who has the most magical items? Tiberius.

TALIESIN: Tiberius.

MATT: Tiberius is a hoarder.

ORION: Wait, what happened?

MATT: Someone asked who has the most magical items.

ORION: Yeah.

MARISHA: Someone asked me what my favorite animal to turn into was. I'd have to say it was probably my tiger, my saber-toothed tiger.

ASHLEY: Minxie!

MARISHA AND TALIESIN: Minxie.

MARISHA: Minxie form, which Grog named because Grog and I went on a–

TRAVIS: We intimidated this–

MARISHA: We went on an intimidation mission, and I was his pet tiger Minxie.

MATT: I like that. The name of the one true dice god is RNGesus. For random number generator.

TRAVIS: I love it.

TALIESIN: (laughs)

MARISHA: RNGesus!

MATT: That's great.

ASHLEY: Hogwarts houses?

LAURA: I'm a Hufflepuff.

MARISHA: What would RNGesus do?

TALIESIN: Hogwarts houses?

ORION: Is that a group question?

LIAM: Hogwarts houses, everyone? Ravenclaw.

LAURA: Hufflepuff.

MATT: Hufflepuff.

MARISHA: Ravenclaw.

TALIESIN: Slytherin.

SAM: Never read it. Never saw it.

LAURA: (gasps)

SAM: Don't know anything about it. Seriously.

LIAM: Bullshit.

SAM: Don't know anything about it.

TRAVIS: Nothing? Zero? Nada?

SAM: Don't know anything about it.

LAURA: Slytherin.

TALIESIN: Slytherin.

LIAM: Hufflepuff.

SAM: Is that like a–

LAURA: No, he's not a Hufflepuff. He's a Slytherin.

LIAM: Sam?

MATT: You're a Slytherin.

LIAM: What the fuck are you talking about?

LAURA: What are you?

ORION: I'm a Slytherin.

MATT: Hufflepuff!

SAM: I'm waiting to read it to my son.

LAURA: We've got a lot of Slytherins in our group.

MARISHA: No Gryffindors in this bitch. Get out, Gryffindor. Get out.

TALIESIN: Actually, when the final book came out, we went to one of those Borders parties and I had my little Slytherin robes. I have Slytherin robes. And all the Slytherin kids were hanging outside of Borders smoking clove cigarettes and hustling little Gryffindor kids for their book money.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: It got really dark.

ASHLEY: That is awesome.

LIAM: Someone continues to ask. In the last Q&A, I referenced going through a rough patch, and they want to know if I'm still going through it, and how D&D helped.

SAM: Okay, bye, guys.

(all laugh)

ORION: Oh, shit.

SAM: Good night.

LIAM: Yeah, I had a problem with one of my ears. It's like two years in. No one has diagnosed it correctly. In the beginning, it was wildly disorienting. I didn't know what was going on. The symptoms were way more extreme than what I'm going through now, so it's not gone, but it's managed, and I've found that running helps a lot, which is why I run like a madman now. And… the most important thing in my life is my wife and my two children. The second most important thing in my life are the people on this couch and this bench. It's kind of eclipsed my job, for me, in the last couple of years. Looking forward to these nights was huge for me, both when I was in the thick of it and still. And I look at everyone here as a second family.

ASHLEY: Oh, Liam.

MARISHA: We love you.

LAURA: I'm going to make a Liam plushie.

ASHLEY: Yeah, man.

MATT: Love this guy here. Look at all the hearts.

TRAVIS: Oh, yeah, we've got to go on Honesty Hour now. Give them the whole shebang. Ride the feels.

MATT: Has Pike tried healing? (laughs)

LAURA: It's a medicine roll over and over and over again.

MATT: She heals quite a bit. It's been awesome. I've seen this a bit. Advice for first-time DMs. I'll give a bunch of that if we end up doing the week off, but quickly, I would say, improvisational classes help tremendously, but being able to think on your feet. Be open to players being creative. Don't always shut people down. It's not you against them. It can be, but I like to think of it more open. You can let them try whatever they come up with, but depending on how elaborate or how ridiculous it is, it might be really hard to happen. And let them fail spectacularly, because it makes a great story. Build out a sheet of a bunch of fantasy names in case they go to a place or meet an NPC you weren't expecting. Then you can just pick a name and make something up on the spot about it and take notes afterward.

LIAM: That's not how you do it, though.

MATT: It's how I used to do it. I wouldn't know where people would go and I'd have a whole list of names and I'd be like–

LIAM: You just have the universe printed on the inside of your skull.

MATT: Kind of. But I still have to pick out of random places sometimes, depending on what you guys do.

LIAM: Oh.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: I don't want to know how it's done.

LAURA: I know. No.

MARISHA: He's destroying the illusion.

LIAM: This all exists somewhere else, doesn't it?

MATT: Most of it does. I write a lot of it up, but there are moments where you have to pull out of the ether because players go this way and you're like, “Uh… all right, let's see where this goes.” But have fun. Learn the rules well because everyone's going to look to you for rules. Have fun. Let players play. Let them be creative. And let them succeed or fail spectacularly.

MARISHA: Have we ever thrown a total curveball at you, where you've had to do that? Where you've had to be like, "Uh… uh…”

MATT: A few times. I tend to prepare pretty openly and loosely so I can have some realm of understanding where you guys are going.

MARISHA: Like that time we sneaked in the back door of the thieves' guild?

MATT: Yeah, that was–

LIAM: That was one of them.

LAURA: Because we just went straight for it.

MATT: Yeah.

LIAM: What about when Grog decided he wanted to vet people to guard Greyskull Keep?

MATT: Yep.

LIAM: That was pulled out of your ass, right?

MATT: A lot of that was pulled out of my ass.

LIAM: Very well done.

TALIESIN: That was amazing.

LAURA: Oh, yeah.

ASHLEY: That was so great.

SAM: We haven't gone to the keep yet, have we?

LAURA: I know, we haven't been back.

LIAM: Not since we left. The last private game before this.

TRAVIS: We got the last six guards that are totally awesome.

ASHLEY: Our warm, comfy beds that we haven't gotten to sleep in yet.

LAURA: Ooh! Which Game of Thrones house do we belong to?

TRAVIS: Baratheon.

LAURA: Stark.

ASHLEY: Probably Stark.

SAM: Slytherin.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: Slytherin. (laughs)

TALIESIN: Greyjoy.

ORION: Somebody asked if Tiberius is inspired by a particular wizard or something like that. He actually is. Somebody mentioned Elminster.

LIAM: Tony Roberts.

ORION: Tony Roberts. That's exactly–

MATT AND ORION: (laugh)

ORION: That's going to be funny, if I actually do that. But no, Tiberius is actually based off Elminster Aumar, who I play in Neverwinter, the MMO. I booked that before we started the group, and then when I decided to make him a sorcerer, I was like– it was right at the same time, too–

MATT: Yeah, same time.

ORION: We just started to play, and that happened, and… yeah, so he's a dragonborn Elminster.

LIAM: Billy Mays, here, for the Wizard's Academy!

ASHLEY: Billy Mays here, with another fantastic creation.

SAM: Are Scanlan's feelings for Pike mutual? Pike, come on, give us a hint.

TRAVIS: Yeah, give us something.

MARISHA: I know, it's been two years, and we don't know.

ASHLEY: I just don't know, because Pike's heart might belong to somebody else.

LAURA: (gasps)

SAM: Wait, what? I never heard this in two years!

ASHLEY: It's my backstory as a character that's just personal. It's my secret that I deal with, whether people know it or not.

MATT: Intrigue!

TRAVIS: You're in love with the Dread Pirate Roberts?

LAURA: I told everybody my Trinket story.

ASHLEY: It's something I'm still working out. I haven't talked to Matt about it.

MATT: Let a girl keep her secrets.

SAM: Well, maybe Scanlan has somebody else in mind, as well.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: Well, this got uncomfortable really quickly.

MARISHA: Yeah. (laughs)

ORION: Scanlan, denied!

MATT: I did not start with Newgrounds Voices, but I have been watching Newgrounds since late 90s.

ASHLEY: But that doesn't mean I couldn't possibly love Scanlan.

SAM: There's a chance?

ASHLEY: There might be a chance.

ORION: That's all you need.

SAM: I could change your heart with enough spells.

ASHLEY: (laughs)

TRAVIS: Were you guys ever playing during the D&D scare of the '80s? Whatever that means.

SAM: What does that mean?

ASHLEY: What is that?

MATT: Oh, the Chick tracts.

LAURA: Oh, when they said it was satanic and stuff? No.

TALIESIN: No, I wasn't playing until the '90s.

TRAVIS: No, we're all much younger.

LIAM: Maybe in '89, I might have been.

TRAVIS: Important: how sexy is Grog? As sexy as you want him to be.

MATT: Enjoy your boxes, buddy!

LIAM: Yeah, I started When I was 10 or 11 in grade school, which was the very end of the '80s.

TALIESIN: Oh my god, this is going so fast.

TRAVIS: Can we have a Kima wedding?

LAURA: Oh, Grog and Kima.

TRAVIS: I'm working on her.

TALIESIN: Where do you get your awesome shirts? They want to know where your shirts come from.

TRAVIS: Oh.

TALIESIN: The internet.

TRAVIS: Yeah.

ORION: We did start this campaign in a different thing. We started in Pathfinder and for a lot of us, me included, that was the first time playing D&D, so Matthew home-brewed everything in Pathfinder, and then right before we decided to do this, we switched over to 5th Edition.

MATT: It was better for a group this size. I think Pathfinder with eight players becomes too weighed-down with floating modifiers, and it becomes very difficult to keep fluid. It's fine if you're a bunch of friends at home playing for eight hours, but when you're playing in front of an audience of thousands on the internet every week, we have to use a system that makes combat go a lot quicker, so 5th Edition was the way to go.

LIAM: I see a good one. I have an answer, I'll start.

MATT: There's your emote, Laura. LIAM: There it is.

LAURA: Oh, Greg did it. Oh, with a little porty emote. That's cute. Thanks, Greg Miller.

TRAVIS: You and a wiener onscreen.

LIAM: Someone wants to know what our favorite moment has been since we started Critical Role. Mine was sneaking into the illithid captain's room with Scanlan, holding a bucket of poop. I was scared to death. I didn't know what was going to happen, and it went great.

MATT: Yeah, you guys rolled really well.

LIAM: It was electric. That was mine. Anybody else?

TALIESIN: My first crit with my new gun, which was also my first kill with my new gun.

LAURA: That was so awesome.

TALIESIN: That felt really good. That felt good.

MATT: Taking out the abyssal abomination.

TALIESIN: That felt nice.

SAM: I think, for me, I enjoyed springing Keyleth out of jail by convincing the guards she had pubic lice.

TRAVIS: (laughs)

MARISHA: Yes.

MATT: Yeah, I forgot about that.

LAURA: Was that during the game?

TALIESIN: That was not during the show.

LAURA: Oh, that was before the show.

SAM: Before the show. Oh, okay.

MARISHA: That was a good one, though.

LAURA: That was a good one.

MARISHA: Was that the same time where I ran at the wall and started foaming at the mouth?

SAM: You were crazy.

LAURA: Yeah, and we had to bust you out. That, and Percy was an awesome lawyer.

TALIESIN: Oh, that's right!

SAM: We had a whole Phoenix Wright party.

TALIESIN: I'd forgotten about that.

MARISHA: We basically took the insanity plea to get me out of prison, as a team.

LAURA: That's a good question, Matt. I just saw, if we all die or if some of us die, do we have to roll in at a level one, or do we start at a higher level?

MATT: No, you guys would start a level behind the rest of the group. The detriment to it is you would be a level lower. That is the drawback of dying or losing a character, is you would be a level or a half-level behind the rest of the party.

LAURA: On top of losing a character.

SAM: New character would be rough, man.

ASHLEY: That would suck.

MATT: It's possible. You guys all know it. We all knew it going in.

SAM: Can I come back as Spider-Man or something?

MATT: I'm not going to hold that back.

TALIESIN: You're not Spider-Man?

MATT: I'm not going to be Marvel in this bitch, okay? I'm not going to be like, “Oh, death. I can take it back any time, and it doesn't matter anymore.” No.

TRAVIS: Do you design specific things for an hourglass? Are there particular scenarios that require it?

MATT: There are. It's harder to do in the Underdark. There aren't so many traps or timed circumstances. I like the hourglass for certain circumstances that have a very definite time limit, and I do think up what the challenge is, what type of skills would work, or let the players come up with creative ways that they can apply their skills to a situation to succeed, and I figure out, loosely off the 4th Edition rules, where I have number of successes vs number of failures in that period of time, and if they don't manage to do it in that time period, it's a failure. I think it's fun. It builds the tension, and the party goes, “oh, shit! We've got to do this now!” I love it. Hourglass is awesome.

LAURA: Do we play any other tabletop games?

SAM: Risk.

TALIESIN: Yeah.

ASHLEY: Risk.

MARISHA: How do you mean, tabletop? All tabletop?

LIAM: Board games, anything.

ORION: I'm a big Magic: The Gathering guy. We play.

MARISHA: Yeah, we like Magic: The Gathering.

ASHLEY: Settlers of Catan.

MARISHA: Settlers of Catan!

MATT: Mansions of Madness.

TALIESIN: Mansions of Madness. Yeah.

MARISHA: I think the four of us here are all Warmachine Hordes players.

MATT: Yeah.

LIAM: I've been playing the board game Dungeon, which is D&D-inspired. Someone also asked, what's a good way to get your wife or your kids or friends involved. I yanked my eight-year-old son in by playing Dungeon with him, and he totally got into it because of Dungeon, and now I am DMing a game for three eight-year-olds.

MATT: Which is awesome.

LIAM: It's like D&D-light in a board game, and if they like the board game, you can say, “You know, if you like this, we can ratchet up a bit.”

MARISHA: Yeah, there's also D&D board games. Branded D&D board games that are fun. Mini dungeon delvers. They're fun.

ORION: I will be on Mulligan soon, and I like red and white, blue and black, and all the colors of the rainbow.

LAURA: I just did that show with Wil. Titansgrave, which is a different tabletop RPG, and it's really fun.

MATT: How do I handle experience leveling in this game? At certain milestones, when characters have a chance to rest– have a breather or sleep for the evening– then that's when experience is divvied out for the next session. Characters don't level in the middle of a battle, or anything, but I keep track of it, usually on a session by session basis, and if there's a moment of rest, then people can level up. I also saw a question, when did Percy build the Bad News, and how long did it take?

TALIESIN: Bad News was built during the changeover to 5th Edition. Took about–

MATT: Four or five months.

TALIESIN: Yeah, it was about four or five months.

MATT: In-game.

TALIESIN: In-game. Sitting at a table just tinkering and tinkering.

TRAVIS: Somebody asked how I became a goliath because it's not an official race in the book. Is it not an official race?

LIAM: It's now in 5th Edition, in one of the added books.

TRAVIS: Now it is. I think I asked Matt what the bigger creatures were in the world and he said orcs and other things and he also said there were goliaths that were half and half and I was like “Can I be that?” He was like, “Sure.”

MATT: Yeah.

TRAVIS: That was a thing I asked Marisha once, during our first game, was, “Wait, I can do whatever I want?” "Kind of.”

MARISHA: Do whatever you want. It's awesome.

TRAVIS: You can try!

MARISHA: Fun, imaginative world.

MATT: How is Critical Role going, compared to how you envisioned it?

SAM: Pretty good!

ORION: Envisioned it?

MATT: One of our biggest fears when this thing came to our attention, when Geek & Sundry contacted us, was we didn't want it to change the game for us. We did this together for fun. We enjoyed it, and it was just a wonderful thing for us for two years.

ORION: Two years plus, man.

MATT: And so our biggest fear was it changing that dynamic, and so we tried to be very careful that we didn't alter how we played, and didn't change the format, really, other than having cameras.

LIAM: We didn't want it to turn into a reality TV show.

LAURA: I was worried even when we were figuring out the setup of the tables, how it was going to work, that being far away from each other was going to screw things up, but it's just like when we were playing at our house across the table from each other.

MATT: Just a little more distance. There's been very little change, except we have other people now that we don't have to spend hours telling them, “Oh, what we do is we play this, and this is what happened.” You guys already know because you watched it, and it's awesome.

MARISHA: Yeah, that's true.

LIAM: There's a light goose to the energy because it feels like we're doing theater, which is the one added difference that I like, because when we played at home, we would have moments where we'd go into lulls or get tired or something, and that doesn't happen here.

LAURA: We're also only playing for three hours, as opposed to eight.

ORION: And I'm drinking a lot less.

TALIESIN: It's much more kinetic.

TRAVIS: How do you handle Percy crafting things?

TALIESIN: I make a standard roll, plus– what is it? Is it dexterity and a modifier on top of that?

MATT: Yeah, he's proficient with a tinkering kit, essentially, so it's a proficiency bonus on top of that, and what it will be is, he'll tell me or describe to me the schematics of what he's trying to build and what materials he has at his disposal, or ask me what he needs for it–

TALIESIN: I built Keyleth a special staff, ages ago.

MARISHA: Yes.

MATT: So if he has the materials, I'll tell him how expensive it is, or how to get the materials, and he attempts the roll. If he fails, wastes all the materials. It's a complete waste.

TALIESIN: Man, I've been doing a lot, lately.

MATT: If he rolls decent, it's functional, for the most part, but the thing with tinkering is it doesn't always quite work how you want. If he rolls really well, then it's pretty damn good.

TALIESIN: And I get a bonus if I'm actually back at the keep.

MATT: At the workshop. The keep has a workshop for him.

LAURA: I saw a thing asking what was it like shooting the opening credits.

(all laugh)

MARISHA: That was fun.

LAURA: Being in costume for it and everything.

LIAM: Silly.

LAURA: Which is really funny, because we did not plan on being in costume.

TRAVIS: No, we thought maybe one or two things.

LAURA: Like a bracer or carry a weapon.

TALIESIN: And then Matt and I emptied out our Ren Faire closets.

MATT: Yep.

TRAVIS: And then alcohol made its way in.

LAURA: We all showed up and were like, “Oh, this is cool! Let's put this on!”

MARISHA: Yeah, it just kept getting more and more involved.

ORION: Everybody give a quick huzzah to Jareth.

ALL: Huzzah to Jareth!

ORION: He graduated high school today.

LAURA: Oh, nice! Congratulations.

MATT: Congratulations, buddy.

MARISHA: Congratulations!

TRAVIS: Somebody asked, “If you accept fan art, would you also accept someone making fight music for the game?”

LIAM: Yeah.

MATT: Totally.

TALIESIN: We don't want to tell anybody what not to do.

SAM: I would accept a small statue of Pike that I can hold near my breast.

TALIESIN: I don't want to see that.

LAURA: Didn't you have one made?

SAM: I did have one made in-game–

ASHLEY: And that's what saved my life.

LAURA: (gasps) That's right, it did! It saved her life.

SAM: I made two. I made one of me that I gave to you, and one of you that I keep with me.

TALIESIN: Is it overwhelming having 8,000 people watching?

TRAVIS: No.

TALIESIN: No.

MATT: It's not overwhelming. It's really cool. It's good to know there's people out there that have any interest in Dungeons & Dragons. I grew up an indoor kid. I was not quite sure if I could tell people I play this game, and now people are much more open to the idea, like, “Oh, Dungeons & Dragons!” It used to be like, “You play D&D? What the shit?” Now it's, “You play D&D? What's it like?” It's much more open. It's great.

LIAM: One of our favorite things about all the feedback we're getting through social media is how many of you guys are starting to play the game.

ALL: Yeah, that's cool.

ASHLEY: That's awesome.

MARISHA: Everyone should try D&D.

TALIESIN: The world would be a better place with more D&D.

MARISHA: The world would be a better place with more D&D.

LIAM: Somebody asked what each of our favorite thing about playing D&D is. The people. We all do a decent amount of gaming in this group, so this just feels like the most social, friend-oriented– it just feels real because we're hashing it out together instead of doing this.

TRAVIS: Personalities are fucking great.

ORION: Which isn't bad!

LIAM: Which is great! We all do it, but it's a nice counter-balance.

ORION: Somebody asked why Tiberius is so loyal to Keyleth. Tiberius comes from a presidential family. A family of political power, of high-seating in his land, so he's very honorable, and Keyleth is royalty in his eyes. He didn't know, because that was a reveal for Keyleth's character. I think it was a year and a half, we were playing, and then you revealed it.

MARISHA: It was a while before I told you guys I was a princess.

LIAM: Hey, it's Scott White. “Happy 10th episode.” Hey, Scott!

ALL: Scott!

MATT: Thanks for coming!

LIAM: Actor Scott White.

TRAVIS: People asked if this will be on Video On Demand or if people miss it, how do they see it?

SAM: Pay Per View.

ZAC: It'll be up on the website.

MARISHA: On the website.

TALIESIN: I think we're just both really snooty, which is why we kind of hang out.

LAURA: Dude, Scott! I was just talking to Amanda Wyatt today about your concert the other night, and I wish I would have been there.

SAM: No.

LAURA: Different one?

SAM: No, it's a totally different Scott White.

TALIESIN: Someone asked if it's weird not being a fantasy character in a fantasy setting, for Percy as a gunslinger. I really like it. I will actually admit that I've always been fascinated by that moment in history where suddenly we went from bows and arrows to guns, so I really like the idea of being the guy who made that terrible mistake and had this really bad idea, and I'm really enjoying…

MARISHA: RPing that guy.

TALIESIN: RPing that guy, and trying to figure out what would drive a human being to do something so stupid as to invent a gun.

LIAM: I love that we have Percy in our group.

MARISHA: Which I think is why Percy is one of my favorite characters.

TALIESIN: He's really screwing the entire future, at this point.

MATT: Yeah.

ORION: Somebody asked us a fun question. If each of us could have a familiar like Trinket, if we could have our own animal, what would it be?

MARISHA: Like as our character?

LAURA: Like a pet?

MARISHA: In-character?

ORION: Tiberius, of course, would have a small dragonite or pseudodragon. Definitely.

TALIESIN: Flying squirrel.

LIAM: That's what I was going to fucking say.

TALIESIN: Bam!

ORION: Oh, and the dragon's name would be Monty.

MARISHA: Keyleth would probably have a mountain lion. Keyleth likes cats, and she lived in the mountains, so something native would have been mountain lion-y.

ORION: Thanks, Effigy.

MATT: Thanks for staying, Sam!

SAM: Oh, yeah. Bye, guys!

ALL: Bye, Sam.

MATT: Sam's got to run back to his family.

TALIESIN: Sam! Text me the change in schedule, if you get a second.

ZAC: I actually think that's a pretty good time to start winding this down.

LIAM: Yeah.

ORION: It's only 11:30.

ZAC: It's been an hour-long Q&A, so I think it's a pretty good time.

MARISHA: It's been an hour?

MATT: All right, so we'll get a few more questions here, and then we'll go ahead and close it on this, guys.

MARISHA: Going back to the question of my favorite thing about D&D, because that kind of got segued out. Aside from the people, I think that it's something really fantastic– not to sound cheesy– and magical when a group of grown adults can get together and use their imagination and have an amazing time, and my favorite thing about Dungeons & Dragons is when you walk away from it, and especially after you've slept on it and after you meditate on it, it's pretty much real. It's just as real as other things we do in our day-to-day lives. If you guys noticed how excited we got when we were like, “Oh my god, you guys haven't met Gilmore yet.” And all of us went, “Oh my god. Gilmore.” And we all got excited over an NPC.

ORION: Nothing that exists, really.

LAURA: I dream about our characters.

MARISHA: Yeah, I do, too. Yeah, I have dreams.

LAURA: Isn't that crazy!

MARISHA: Because for us, Gilmore is real, and Pike is real, which is why we all fucking cried our eyes out when Pike died.

TALIESIN: Is it my imagination that Gilmore is blond, by the way? Does everybody else see Gilmore as very blond?

LAURA: Oh, I pictured Gilmore with black hair.

ASHLEY: I pictured him with black hair, too.

TALIESIN: I saw big curly blond hair.

LAURA: Oh, I like that! I pictured him with black, slicked-back, greasy hair in a ponytail.

TALIESIN: I can see that, too.

ORION: What's your favorite part, Ashley?

ASHLEY: It's funny, because when we first started, and for the two years that we've been doing it, there was an element that I liked about it, that it was just ours, and then when I would try to tell people, I was like, “Ugh, they're not going to understand.” We get to go and play make-believe, and nobody is judging anybody and we can just go do it. So I was hesitant when we were starting the show, but what's been awesome is that you guys have been so accepting and such an amazing group in the chat room. And how you guys have been supportive of us. This has been one of my favorite things that I've been a part of… in my life? That's a really bold statement.

MATT: No, I feel the same way.

ASHLEY: I love it so much. After two years, obviously there's so much more of an attachment to it, but I just love it. I love it so much.

TALIESIN: Everyone's so nice. I barely believe it's the internet.

MATT: Oh, look at all the Ashley hearts.

TALIESIN: Aww.

ASHLEY: Hey, man.

ZAC: Somebody wanted to know if any of you guys had ever reached god mode status in past D&D campaigns.

MARISHA: No.

TALIESIN: Yes.

ZAC: Yes, you have?

TALIESIN: Yeah, I did. But my DM was not very good, so the game got so boring we quit because our DM was weak.

MATT: Someone asked about the PewDiePie thing. What it was like DMing for him and Ken? It was fun. They were great. They were a lot of fun. We only had half an hour to play, both for me to teach them and to play through a session, so it was a very new challenge of, “All right, let's do this!” Dungeons & Dragons. But it worked out pretty well. We had a good time and left on a cliffhanger, and as long as they want to keep bringing me back to do it occasionally, I'm happy to, so let them know that you enjoyed it and they should have me back, because it was a good time.

ORION: I'm going to say what my favorite part of D&D is.

MARISHA: What's your favorite part of D&D, Orion?

ORION: Much like doing improv, it's a wonderful escape. I know I'm really frantic in how I play it. Poor Matthew. He puts up with arguments about spells that I want to make super OP, and he's like, “You can't do that.” I'm like, “But why?” Those are our arguments.

MATT: Just keeping the balance.

ORION: When we got together and we would play for eight hours, we would get together and have lunch or dinner and we would spend a lot of time, and every game was a very special day, so no matter if the day was going great or not, it didn't matter because as soon as the game started, it was a whole different world that we had to step into, and now we live in it and we breathe it. It's great. We're all actors, and to get lost in each other, and with how Matthew narrates, and you'll see it when you watch the show, I'm like, “Oh,” and there's cameras now, and that's a whole other layer, and I still get lost in Keyleth shedding a tear, and the way Clarota interacts differently. I don't see Matthew doing it. I see (creature noise) that.

LAURA: Isn't that crazy that it's instantly Clarota and it's instantly Kima? It's not Matt anymore, as soon as it's that character.

ORION: So it is that sense of realistic magic that exists every single game.

MARISHA: It's weird, too, because I almost feel like bringing the game public and for everybody else, and the fact that we're doing it weekly, it's almost bled the reality lines even more, because now they are like, “Oh, yeah, totally. Clarota. Yeah, we totally know who you're talking about.” And so we're like, "Yeah, Clarota, right?” You guys know Clarota. And we're getting fan art.

TALIESIN: This is the speed our personal text messages, or group text messages, go at.

MARISHA: (laughs) Yeah, it's true.

ASHLEY: Our group text message thread is insane.

MARISHA: Yeah.

ASHLEY: The fan art that you guys have been putting out is so amazing.

LAURA: It makes us so happy.

ZAC: We're working on getting all of that up on the website. We're working on it.

LAURA: Awesome.

MATT: That's going to be great.

LAURA: I save so many pictures to my phone.

LIAM: I save it all.

LAURA: I have no reason for it, but I scroll through it when I'm by myself.

LIAM: I have a process. It goes into my iPhone folder, and then right into Dropbox.

TALIESIN: You find all the good stuff.

LAURA: Yeah, you find a lot of good stuff. Liam, man, you find so much on the internet.

TALIESIN: He's the winner for finding stuff.

LIAM: Pile of shit has a thousand eyes.

(all laugh)

TALIESIN: I love watching people take risks. That's my favorite thing about D&D: it's such a good place to take risks. And the rewards that come with it are so fantastic.

MATT: Two quick questions I want to answer real fast, when you're done.

TALIESIN: No, I'm done. Go ahead.

MATT: One: how did I get into dungeon mastering? By having a really terrible dungeon master.

ORION: (laughs)

LIAM: Thanks to that guy!

MATT: Yeah. Really nice guy in high school. My first couple of games I ever played, and he was just terrible, and he had a player character in the group that was a paladin but also a samurai, and he gave him all the best magical equipment and would fight party members. It was awful. I got frustrated, so I bought the books myself and learned to do it on my own. I've been doing it ever since.

ORION: There you go. What was the other thing?

MATT: What was that?

ORION: You said there were two questions.

MATT: I forgot what the other one was.

ZAC: There's another one that keeps getting asked over and over again. If you guys could be a different race, what would you be?

LAURA: A different class?

ORION: I think I would want to be Japanese because it would be a whole different cultural experience.

MARISHA: And they stay young forever.

ZAC: I thought that's what they meant.

LIAM: Ukraine, definitely.

TALIESIN: Dutch.

LIAM: I change my mind about that every day. I think about what to do once he kills me off.

LAURA: Yeah. I think I definitely, if I have to re-roll, which I don't ever want to have to do, but I would want to be a tiefling.

TALIESIN: Tieflings are cool. I like being token human. Token human has been a lot of fun.

LAURA: I know! I also like being a human.

MATT: Humans are pretty awesome.

ORION: Dragonborn for life.

MATT: (laughs) Forever.

TALIESIN: My previous character was dragonborn.

LIAM: I don't want to say, because I'm convinced Matt will kill me eventually, and I don't want to spoil whatever I cook up.

MATT: Okay.

LAURA: Oh, that's true.

MARISHA: I might have to bring in a dwarf. It might be time.

MATT: If I could play a character, it would be a dwarf. Probably a dwarf bard. I love dwarves so much.

LAURA: You're so good at dwarves.

LIAM: Can we hear your dwarf accent again?

MARISHA: Well…

MATT: Marisha, want to give us an example?

MARISHA: (Swedish accent) Oh, you mean this dwarf?

ORION AND MATT: (crack up)

MARISHA: (same accent) This dwarf accent?

(all laugh)

ASHLEY: It's a Swedish dwarf!

LIAM: (similar accent) Welcome to IKEA.

TRAVIS: Wow.

TALIESIN: That was a dwarf chef.

MARISHA: (same accent) Hello! Hello, welcome to Kraghammer.

TALIESIN: (imitates the Swedish Chef)

MARISHA: (same accent) Where's the d20?

ORION: (Scottish accent) She's the special dwarf.

ZAC: I have a good question to end out on. I also like what somebody in the chat room said that for Critical Role fans, you could call them Critters.

MARISHA: (gasps) Critters!

LIAM: I said that months ago.

LAURA: I love it!

TALIESIN: (cheers)

ASHLEY: Oh, Critters, I love you!

MATT: Oh, that's awesome. Thank you, Liam. Thank you, chat.

ZAC: So you guys have officially dubbed yourselves Critters, and by yourselves, I mean by Liam.

(all laugh)

ZAC: The question I think would be good to end out on is, “What would each of you recommend to them to tell their friends to get them into D&D?” How would you recommend other people push D&D onto people?

LIAM: Live a video game while drinking with your friends.

LAURA AND ASHLEY: Yeah.

LAURA: Or hanging with your friends. You don't have to drink.

ASHLEY: Yeah, but I feel that also the DM makes all the difference in the world. Find a good DM. Which, there isn't anyone as good as Matt.

MATT: Or be one. That's not true.

MARISHA: Step up.

MATT: It's communal storytelling. You forge memories with friends. It's a really cool improvised story that you all create together.

LIAM: And playing with someone who's not a crazy talented voice actor is still better than not playing, so find a DM and start a game. Start your first game.

ORION: I tell people it's not about math, it's not about paper and pencil. When you were a kid and you went outside and played all day and you were just a kid? That's what this is. It's just remembering how to do that again with friends.

ZAC: That's what you fucking tell people.

MARISHA: It's pretend as adults.

TALIESIN: It's a game that you can play with your friends that will create the kinds of bonded, shared experiences that created the friends you had in high school. The friends you just don't get anymore. But you can get them by doing this. This is to make that high school friend again.

MARISHA: Totally. If you can find a group of friends that you can openly play D&D with, without them judging you.

LAURA: And even if it's not people you know very well. If you find people that like D&D– so many people that we've seen online, and some of our friends, don't have D&D groups, and they find a place to go and play D&D and meet those people. Honestly, I didn't know you very well, I didn't know Orion very well, when we started, and now all of us are best friends.

LIAM: Now we're thick as thieves.

LAURA: It creates that.

TALIESIN: This is a group of people I see more often than any other group.

LAURA: I know, we see each other more than almost anybody else in our lives.

ZAC: I like the hashtag #BondageFriends.

MATT: (laughs)

LAURA AND MARISHA: Bondage friends.

ORION: Well, hold on.

TALIESIN: That's a whole other group of friends.

ORION: I don't love that hashtag.

TALIESIN: I see them about once a month, really.

LAURA: We've got to get going. Grog has a session in the morning.

ZAC: Yeah, so I think that's good.

TALIESIN: It's funny because–

MATT AND TALIESIN: It's true.

ZAC: I think that's a good time to close it out. Thank you, everyone, for getting us to that thousand shirts sold.

MATT: You guys were amazing. Thank you so much.

ZAC: Every month, we're going to have a new special limited-edition Critical Role shirt going up on Teespring, but we're also launching a merch store in June that will have lots of different Critical Role shirts, so you'll have many options to choose from, and those will be shirts that live on forever, but the shirts that we sell on Teespring will be limited edition. You'll only be able to have them within two weeks.

ORION: I have a weird thing, too. I'm doing a thing where if you have a PS4 and you follow me on Twitter, @orionacaba, every 20 followers, I'm going to randomly pick one person. I'll tweet at you, and then tweet me your PS4 handle, and I'll add you to my friends list and we can play together.

MATT: There you go.

ORION: So yeah, hit me up.

MATT: Guys, thank you all so much. Sincerely, for watching, for being amazing, and for tuning in to enjoy our silliness.

LAURA: We love you, Critters!

MARISHA: See you next week! 