AN ATTEMPT AT SELF-CRITICISM.



I.


Whatever may lie at the bottom of this doubtful book must be a
question of the first rank and attractiveness, moreover a deeply
personal question,--in proof thereof observe the time in which it
originated, _in spite_ of which it originated, the exciting period
of the Franco-German war of 1870-71. While the thunder of the battle
of Wörth rolled over Europe, the ruminator and riddle-lover, who had
to be the parent of this book, sat somewhere in a nook of the Alps,
lost in riddles and ruminations, consequently very much concerned and
unconcerned at the same time, and wrote down his meditations on the
_Greeks,_--the kernel of the curious and almost inaccessible book, to
which this belated prologue (or epilogue) is to be devoted. A few weeks
later: and he found himself under the walls of Metz, still wrestling
with the notes of interrogation he had set down concerning the alleged
"cheerfulness" of the Greeks and of Greek art; till at last, in that
month of deep suspense, when peace was debated at Versailles, he too
attained to peace with himself, and, slowly recovering from a disease
brought home from the field, made up his mind definitely regarding the
"Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of _Music."_--From music? Music and
Tragedy? Greeks and tragic music? Greeks and the Art-work of pessimism?
A race of men, well-fashioned, beautiful, envied, life-inspiring, like
no other race hitherto, the Greeks--indeed? The Greeks were _in need_
of tragedy? Yea--of art? Wherefore--Greek art?...

We can thus guess where the great note of interrogation concerning the
value of existence had been set. Is pessimism _necessarily_ the sign of
decline, of decay, of failure, of exhausted and weakened instincts?--as
was the case with the Indians, as is, to all appearance, the case with
us "modern" men and Europeans? Is there a pessimism of _strength_? An
intellectual predilection for what is hard, awful, evil, problematical
in existence, owing to well-being, to exuberant health, to _fullness_
of existence? Is there perhaps suffering in overfullness itself? A
seductive fortitude with the keenest of glances, which _yearns_ for
the terrible, as for the enemy, the worthy enemy, with whom it may try
its strength? from whom it is willing to learn what "fear" is? What
means _tragic_ myth to the Greeks of the best, strongest, bravest era?
And the prodigious phenomenon of the Dionysian? And that which was
born thereof, tragedy?--And again: that of which tragedy died, the
Socratism of morality, the dialectics, contentedness and cheerfulness
of the theoretical man--indeed? might not this very Socratism
be a sign of decline, of weariness, of disease, of anarchically
disintegrating instincts? And the "Hellenic cheerfulness" of the later
Hellenism merely a glowing sunset? The Epicurean will _counter_ to
pessimism merely a precaution of the sufferer? And science itself,
our science--ay, viewed as a symptom of life, what really signifies
all science? Whither, worse still, _whence_--all science? Well? Is
scientism perhaps only fear and evasion of pessimism? A subtle defence
against--_truth!_ Morally speaking, something like falsehood and
cowardice? And, unmorally speaking, an artifice? O Socrates, Socrates,
was this perhaps _thy_ secret? Oh mysterious ironist, was this perhaps
thine--irony?...



2.


What I then laid hands on, something terrible and dangerous, a
problem with horns, not necessarily a bull itself, but at all events
a _new_ problem: I should say to-day it was the _problem of science_
itself--science conceived for the first time as problematic, as
questionable. But the book, in which my youthful ardour and suspicion
then discharged themselves--what an _impossible_ book must needs
grow out of a task so disagreeable to youth. Constructed of nought
but precocious, unripened self-experiences, all of which lay close
to the threshold of the communicable, based on the groundwork of
_art_--for the problem of science cannot be discerned on the groundwork
of science,--a book perhaps for artists, with collateral analytical
and retrospective aptitudes (that is, an exceptional kind of artists,
for whom one must seek and does not even care to seek ...), full of
psychological innovations and artists' secrets, with an artists'
metaphysics in the background, a work of youth, full of youth's mettle
and youth's melancholy, independent, defiantly self-sufficient even
when it seems to bow to some authority and self-veneration; in short,
a firstling-work, even in every bad sense of the term; in spite of its
senile problem, affected with every fault of youth, above all with
youth's prolixity and youth's "storm and stress": on the other hand,
in view of the success it had (especially with the great artist to
whom it addressed itself, as it were, in a duologue, Richard Wagner) a
_demonstrated_ book, I mean a book which, at any rate, sufficed "for
the best of its time." On this account, if for no other reason, it
should be treated with some consideration and reserve; yet I shall not
altogether conceal how disagreeable it now appears to me, how after
sixteen years it stands a total stranger before me,--before an eye
which is more mature, and a hundred times more fastidious, but which
has by no means grown colder nor lost any of its interest in that
self-same task essayed for the first time by this daring book,--_to
view science through the optics of the artist, and art moreover through
the optics of life...._



3.


I say again, to-day it is an impossible book to me,--I call it badly
written, heavy, painful, image-angling and image-entangling, maudlin,
sugared at times even to femininism, uneven in tempo, void of the will
to logical cleanliness, very convinced and therefore rising above the
necessity of demonstration, distrustful even of the _propriety_ of
demonstration, as being a book for initiates, as "music" for those who
are baptised with the name of Music, who are united from the beginning
of things by common ties of rare experiences in art, as a countersign
for blood-relations _in artibus._--a haughty and fantastic book,
which from the very first withdraws even more from the _profanum
vulgus_ of the "cultured" than from the "people," but which also, as
its effect has shown and still shows, knows very well how to seek
fellow-enthusiasts and lure them to new by-ways and dancing-grounds.
Here, at any rate--thus much was acknowledged with curiosity as well
as with aversion--a _strange_ voice spoke, the disciple of a still
"unknown God," who for the time being had hidden himself under the
hood of the scholar, under the German's gravity and disinclination for
dialectics, even under the bad manners of the Wagnerian; here was a
spirit with strange and still nameless needs, a memory bristling with
questions, experiences and obscurities, beside which stood the name
Dionysos like one more note of interrogation; here spoke--people said
to themselves with misgivings--something like a mystic and almost
mænadic soul, which, undecided whether it should disclose or conceal
itself, stammers with an effort and capriciously as in a strange
tongue. It should have _sung,_ this "new soul"--and not spoken! What
a pity, that I did not dare to say what I then had to say, as a poet:
I could have done so perhaps! Or at least as a philologist:--for even
at the present day well-nigh everything in this domain remains to be
discovered and disinterred by the philologist! Above all the problem,
_that_ here there _is_ a problem before us,--and that, so long as we
have no answer to the question "what is Dionysian?" the Greeks are now
as ever wholly unknown and inconceivable....



4.


Ay, what is Dionysian?--In this book may be found an answer,--a
"knowing one" speaks here, the votary and disciple of his god.
Perhaps I should now speak more guardedly and less eloquently of a
psychological question so difficult as the origin of tragedy among the
Greeks. A fundamental question is the relation of the Greek to pain,
his degree of sensibility,--did this relation remain constant? or did
it veer about?--the question, whether his ever-increasing _longing
for beauty,_ for festivals, gaieties, new cults, did really grow out
of want, privation, melancholy, pain? For suppose even this to be
true--and Pericles (or Thucydides) intimates as much in the great
Funeral Speech:--whence then the opposite longing, which appeared
first in the order of time, the _longing for the ugly_, the good,
resolute desire of the Old Hellene for pessimism, for tragic myth, for
the picture of all that is terrible, evil, enigmatical, destructive,
fatal at the basis of existence,--whence then must tragedy have
sprung? Perhaps from _joy,_ from strength, from exuberant health, from
over-fullness. And what then, physiologically speaking, is the meaning
of that madness, out of which comic as well as tragic art has grown,
the Dionysian madness? What? perhaps madness is not necessarily the
symptom of degeneration, of decline, of belated culture? Perhaps there
are--a question for alienists--neuroses of _health_? of folk-youth
and youthfulness? What does that synthesis of god and goat in the
Satyr point to? What self-experience what "stress," made the Greek
think of the Dionysian reveller and primitive man as a satyr? And as
regards the origin of the tragic chorus: perhaps there were endemic
ecstasies in the eras when the Greek body bloomed and the Greek soul
brimmed over with life? Visions and hallucinations, which took hold
of entire communities, entire cult-assemblies? What if the Greeks
in the very wealth of their youth had the will _to be_ tragic and
were pessimists? What if it was madness itself, to use a word of
Plato's, which brought the _greatest_ blessings upon Hellas? And
what if, on the other hand and conversely, at the very time of their
dissolution and weakness, the Greeks became always more optimistic,
more superficial, more histrionic, also more ardent for logic and
the logicising of the world,--consequently at the same time more
"cheerful" and more "scientific"? Ay, despite all "modern ideas" and
prejudices of the democratic taste, may not the triumph of _optimism,_
the _common sense_ that has gained the upper hand, the practical and
theoretical _utilitarianism,_ like democracy itself, with which it is
synchronous--be symptomatic of declining vigour, of approaching age,
of physiological weariness? And _not_ at all--pessimism? Was Epicurus
an optimist--because a _sufferer_?... We see it is a whole bundle of
weighty questions which this book has taken upon itself,--let us not
fail to add its weightiest question! Viewed through the optics of
_life,_ what is the meaning of--morality?...



5.


Already in the foreword to Richard Wagner, art---and _not_ morality--is
set down as the properly _metaphysical_ activity of man; in the
book itself the piquant proposition recurs time and again, that the
existence of the world is _justified_ only as an æsthetic phenomenon.
Indeed, the entire book recognises only an artist-thought and
artist-after-thought behind all occurrences,--a "God," if you will,
but certainly only an altogether thoughtless and unmoral artist-God,
who, in construction as in destruction, in good as in evil, desires
to become conscious of his own equable joy and sovereign glory; who,
in creating worlds, frees himself from the _anguish_ of fullness
and _overfullness,_ from the _suffering_ of the contradictions
concentrated within him. The world, that is, the redemption of God
_attained_ at every moment, as the perpetually changing, perpetually
new vision of the most suffering, most antithetical, most contradictory
being, who contrives to redeem himself only in _appearance:_ this
entire artist-metaphysics, call it arbitrary, idle, fantastic, if
you will,--the point is, that it already betrays a spirit, which is
determined some day, at all hazards, to make a stand against the
_moral_ interpretation and significance of life. Here, perhaps for the
first time, a pessimism "Beyond Good and Evil" announces itself, here
that "perverseness of disposition" obtains expression and formulation,
against which Schopenhauer never grew tired of hurling beforehand his
angriest imprecations and thunderbolts,--a philosophy which dares to
put, derogatorily put, morality itself in the world of phenomena, and
not only among "phenomena" (in the sense of the idealistic _terminus
technicus_), but among the "illusions," as appearance, semblance,
error, interpretation, accommodation, art. Perhaps the depth of this
_antimoral_ tendency may be best estimated from the guarded and
hostile silence with which Christianity is treated throughout this
book,--Christianity, as being the most extravagant burlesque of the
moral theme to which mankind has hitherto been obliged to listen. In
fact, to the purely æsthetic world-interpretation and justification
taught in this book, there is no greater antithesis than the Christian
dogma, which is _only_ and will be only moral, and which, with
its absolute standards, for instance, its truthfulness of God,
relegates--that is, disowns, convicts, condemns--art, _all_ art, to
the realm of _falsehood._ Behind such a mode of thought and valuation,
which, if at all genuine, must be hostile to art, I always experienced
what was _hostile to life,_ the wrathful, vindictive counterwill to
life itself: for all life rests on appearance, art, illusion, optics,
necessity of perspective and error. From the very first Christianity
was, essentially and thoroughly, the nausea and surfeit of Life for
Life, which only disguised, concealed and decked itself out under the
belief in "another" or "better" life. The hatred of the "world," the
curse on the affections, the fear of beauty and sensuality, another
world, invented for the purpose of slandering this world the more,
at bottom a longing for. Nothingness, for the end, for rest, for the
"Sabbath of Sabbaths"--all this, as also the unconditional will of
Christianity to recognise _only_ moral values, has always appeared to
me as the most dangerous and ominous of all possible forms of a "will
to perish"; at the least, as the symptom of a most fatal disease, of
profoundest weariness, despondency, exhaustion, impoverishment of
life,--for before the tribunal of morality (especially Christian, that
is, unconditional morality) life _must_ constantly and inevitably be
the loser, because life _is_ something essentially unmoral,--indeed,
oppressed with the weight of contempt and the everlasting No, life
_must_ finally be regarded as unworthy of desire, as in itself
unworthy. Morality itself what?--may not morality be a "will to
disown life," a secret instinct for annihilation, a principle of
decay, of depreciation, of slander, a beginning of the end? And,
consequently, the danger of dangers?... It was _against_ morality,
therefore, that my instinct, as an intercessory-instinct for life,
turned in this questionable book, inventing for itself a fundamental
counter--dogma and counter-valuation of life, purely artistic, purely
_anti-Christian._ What should I call it? As a philologist and man of
words I baptised it, not without some liberty--for who could be sure
of the proper name of the Antichrist?--with the name of a Greek god: I
called it _Dionysian._



6.


You see which problem I ventured to touch upon in this early work?...
How I now regret, that I had not then the courage (or immodesty?) to
allow myself, in all respects, the use of an _individual language_
for such _individual_ contemplations and ventures in the field of
thought--that I laboured to express, in Kantian and Schopenhauerian
formulæ, strange and new valuations, which ran fundamentally counter
to the spirit of Kant and Schopenhauer, as well as to their taste!
What, forsooth, were Schopenhauer's views on tragedy? "What gives"--he
says in _Welt als Wille und Vorstellung,_ II. 495--"to all tragedy
that singular swing towards elevation, is the awakening of the
knowledge that the world, that life, cannot satisfy us thoroughly,
and consequently is _not worthy_ of our attachment In this consists
the tragic spirit: it therefore leads to _resignation_." Oh, how
differently Dionysos spoke to me! Oh how far from me then was just
this entire resignationism!--But there is something far worse in this
book, which I now regret even more than having obscured and spoiled
Dionysian anticipations with Schopenhauerian formulæ: to wit, that, in
general, I _spoiled_ the grand _Hellenic problem,_ as it had opened
up before me, by the admixture of the most modern things! That I
entertained hopes, where nothing was to be hoped for, where everything
pointed all-too-clearly to an approaching end! That, on the basis of
our latter-day German music, I began to fable about the "spirit of
Teutonism," as if it were on the point of discovering and returning
to itself,--ay, at the very time that the German spirit which not so
very long before had had the will to the lordship over Europe, the
strength to lead and govern Europe, testamentarily and conclusively
_resigned_ and, under the pompous pretence of empire-founding,
effected its transition to mediocritisation, democracy, and "modern
ideas." In very fact, I have since learned to regard this "spirit of
Teutonism" as something to be despaired of and unsparingly treated,
as also our present _German music,_ which is Romanticism through and
through and the most un-Grecian of all possible forms of art: and
moreover a first-rate nerve-destroyer, doubly dangerous for a people
given to drinking and revering the unclear as a virtue, namely, in
its twofold capacity of an intoxicating and stupefying narcotic. Of
course, apart from all precipitate hopes and faulty applications to
matters specially modern, with which I then spoiled my first book, the
great Dionysian note of interrogation, as set down therein, continues
standing on and on, even with reference to music: how must we conceive
of a music, which is no longer of Romantic origin, like the German; but
of _Dionysian_?...



7.


--But, my dear Sir, if _your_ book is not Romanticism, what in
the world is? Can the deep hatred of the present, of "reality"
and "modern ideas" be pushed farther than has been done in your
artist-metaphysics?--which would rather believe in Nothing, or in
the devil, than in the "Now"? Does not a radical bass of wrath and
annihilative pleasure growl on beneath all your contrapuntal vocal
art and aural seduction, a mad determination to oppose all that "now"
is, a will which is not so very far removed from practical nihilism
and which seems to say: "rather let nothing be true, than that _you_
should be in the right, than that _your_ truth should prevail!"
Hear, yourself, my dear Sir Pessimist and art-deifier, with ever
so unlocked ears, a single select passage of your own book, that
not ineloquent dragon-slayer passage, which may sound insidiously
rat-charming to young ears and hearts. What? is not that the true
blue romanticist-confession of 1830 under the mask of the pessimism
of 1850? After which, of course, the usual romanticist finale at once
strikes up,--rupture, collapse, return and prostration before an old
belief, before _the_ old God.... What? is not your pessimist book
itself a piece of anti-Hellenism and Romanticism, something "equally
intoxicating and befogging," a narcotic at all events, ay, a piece of
music, of _German_ music? But listen:

    Let us imagine a rising generation with this undauntedness
    of vision, with this heroic impulse towards the prodigious,
    let us imagine the bold step of these dragon-slayers,
    the proud daring with which they turn their backs on all
    the effeminate doctrines of optimism, in order "to live
    resolutely" in the Whole and in the Full: _would it not be
    necessary_ for the tragic man of this culture, with his
    self-discipline to earnestness and terror, to desire a new
    art, _the art of metaphysical comfort,_ tragedy as the
    Helena belonging to him, and that he should exclaim with
    Faust:

        "Und sollt ich nicht, sehnsüchtigster Gewalt,
        In's Leben ziehn die einzigste Gestalt?"[1]


"Would it not be _necessary_?" ... No, thrice no! ye young
romanticists: it would _not_ be necessary! But it is very probable,
that things may _end_ thus, that _ye_ may end thus, namely "comforted,"
as it is written, in spite of all self-discipline to earnestness and
terror; metaphysically comforted, in short, as Romanticists are wont to
end, as _Christians...._ No! ye should first of all learn the art of
earthly comfort, ye should learn to _laugh,_ my young friends, if ye
are at all determined to remain pessimists: if so, you will perhaps,
as laughing ones, eventually send all metaphysical comfortism to the
devil--and metaphysics first of all! Or, to say it in the language of
that Dionysian ogre, called _Zarathustra_:

    "Lift up your hearts, my brethren, high, higher! And do
    not forget your legs! Lift up also your legs, ye good
    dancers--and better still if ye stand also on your heads!

    "This crown of the laughter, this rose-garland crown--I
    myself have put on this crown; I myself have consecrated my
    laughter. No one else have I found to-day strong enough for
    this.

    "Zarathustra the dancer, Zarathustra the light one,
    who beckoneth with his pinions, one ready for flight,
    beckoning unto all birds, ready and prepared, a blissfully
    light-spirited one:--

    "Zarathustra the soothsayer, Zarathustra the sooth-laugher,
    no impatient one, no absolute one, one who loveth leaps and
    side-leaps: I myself have put on this crown!

    "This crown of the laughter, this rose-garland crown--to
    you my brethren do I cast this crown! Laughing have I
    consecrated: ye higher men, _learn,_ I pray you--to laugh!"

    _Thus spake Zarathustra_, lxxiii. 17, 18, and 20.

SILS-MARIA, OBERENGADIN, _August_ 1886.


[1]

    And shall not I, by mightiest desire,
    In living shape that sole fair form acquire?
    SWANWICK, trans. of _Faust._




THE BIRTH OF TRAGEDY

FROM THE SPIRIT OF MUSIC




FOREWORD TO RICHARD WAGNER.


In order to keep at a distance all the possible scruples, excitements,
and misunderstandings to which the thoughts gathered in this essay
will give occasion, considering the peculiar character of our æsthetic
publicity, and to be able also Co write the introductory remarks
with the same contemplative delight, the impress of which, as the
petrifaction of good and elevating hours, it bears on every page, I
form a conception of the moment when you, my highly honoured friend,
will receive this essay; how you, say after an evening walk in the
winter snow, will behold the unbound Prometheus on the title-page,
read my name, and be forthwith convinced that, whatever this essay may
contain, the author has something earnest and impressive to say, and,
moreover, that in all his meditations he communed with you as with one
present and could thus write only what befitted your presence. You
will thus remember that it was at the same time as your magnificent
dissertation on Beethoven originated, viz., amidst the horrors and
sublimities of the war which had just then broken out, that I collected
myself for these thoughts. But those persons would err, to whom this
collection suggests no more perhaps than the antithesis of patriotic
excitement and æsthetic revelry, of gallant earnestness and sportive
delight. Upon a real perusal of this essay, such readers will, rather
to their surprise, discover how earnest is the German problem we have
to deal with, which we properly place, as a vortex and turning-point,
in the very midst of German hopes. Perhaps, however, this same class
of readers will be shocked at seeing an æsthetic problem taken so
seriously, especially if they can recognise in art no more than a merry
diversion, a readily dispensable court-jester to the "earnestness
of existence": as if no one were aware of the real meaning of this
confrontation with the "earnestness of existence." These earnest ones
may be informed that I am convinced that art is the highest task and
the properly metaphysical activity of this life, as it is understood by
the man, to whom, as my sublime protagonist on this path, I would now
dedicate this essay.

BASEL, _end of the year_ 1871.




THE BIRTH OF TRAGEDY.



1.


We shall have gained much for the science of æsthetics, when once we
have perceived not only by logical inference, but by the immediate
certainty of intuition, that the continuous development of art is bound
up with the duplexity of the _Apollonian_ and the _Dionysian:_ in
like manner as procreation is dependent on the duality of the sexes,
involving perpetual conflicts with only periodically intervening
reconciliations. These names we borrow from the Greeks, who disclose
to the intelligent observer the profound mysteries of their view of
art, not indeed in concepts, but in the impressively clear figures of
their world of deities. It is in connection with Apollo and Dionysus,
the two art-deities of the Greeks, that we learn that there existed in
the Grecian world a wide antithesis, in origin and aims, between the
art of the shaper, the Apollonian, and the non-plastic art of music,
that of Dionysus: both these so heterogeneous tendencies run parallel
to each other, for the most part openly at variance, and continually
inciting each other to new and more powerful births, to perpetuate in
them the strife of this antithesis, which is but seemingly bridged over
by their mutual term "Art"; till at last, by a metaphysical miracle
of the Hellenic will, they appear paired with each other, and through
this pairing eventually generate the equally Dionysian and Apollonian
art-work of Attic tragedy.

In order to bring these two tendencies within closer range, let us
conceive them first of all as the separate art-worlds of _dreamland_
and _drunkenness;_ between which physiological phenomena a contrast
may be observed analogous to that existing between the Apollonian and
the Dionysian. In dreams, according to the conception of Lucretius,
the glorious divine figures first appeared to the souls of men, in
dreams the great shaper beheld the charming corporeal structure of
superhuman beings, and the Hellenic poet, if consulted on the mysteries
of poetic inspiration, would likewise have suggested dreams and would
have offered an explanation resembling that of Hans Sachs in the
Meistersingers:--

    Mein Freund, das grad' ist Dichters Werk,
    dass er sein Träumen deut' und merk'.
    Glaubt mir, des Menschen wahrster Wahn
    wird ihm im Traume aufgethan:
    all' Dichtkunst und Poeterei
    ist nichts als Wahrtraum-Deuterei.[1]


The beauteous appearance of the dream-worlds, in the production of
which every man is a perfect artist, is the presupposition of all
plastic art, and in fact, as we shall see, of an important half of
poetry also. We take delight in the immediate apprehension of form; all
forms speak to us; there is nothing indifferent, nothing superfluous.
But, together with the highest life of this dream-reality we also have,
glimmering through it, the sensation of its appearance: such at least
is my experience, as to the frequency, ay, normality of which I could
adduce many proofs, as also the sayings of the poets. Indeed, the man
of philosophic turn has a foreboding that underneath this reality in
which we live and have our being, another and altogether different
reality lies concealed, and that therefore it is also an appearance;
and Schopenhauer actually designates the gift of occasionally regarding
men and things as mere phantoms and dream-pictures as the criterion of
philosophical ability. Accordingly, the man susceptible to art stands
in the same relation to the reality of dreams as the philosopher to
the reality of existence; he is a close and willing observer, for from
these pictures he reads the meaning of life, and by these processes
he trains himself for life. And it is perhaps not only the agreeable
and friendly pictures that he realises in himself with such perfect
understanding: the earnest, the troubled, the dreary, the gloomy, the
sudden checks, the tricks of fortune, the uneasy presentiments, in
short, the whole "Divine Comedy" of life, and the Inferno, also pass
before him, not merely like pictures on the wall--for he too lives and
suffers in these scenes,--and yet not without that fleeting sensation
of appearance. And perhaps many a one will, like myself, recollect
having sometimes called out cheeringly and not without success amid the
dangers and terrors of dream-life: "It is a dream! I will dream on!" I
have likewise been told of persons capable of continuing the causality
of one and the same dream for three and even more successive nights:
all of which facts clearly testify that our innermost being, the common
substratum of all of us, experiences our dreams with deep joy and
cheerful acquiescence.

This cheerful acquiescence in the dream-experience has likewise been
embodied by the Greeks in their Apollo: for Apollo, as the god of
all shaping energies, is also the soothsaying god. He, who (as the
etymology of the name indicates) is the "shining one," the deity of
light, also rules over the fair appearance of the inner world of
fantasies. The higher truth, the perfection of these states in contrast
to the only partially intelligible everyday world, ay, the deep
consciousness of nature, healing and helping in sleep and dream, is at
the same time the symbolical analogue of the faculty of soothsaying
and, in general, of the arts, through which life is made possible and
worth living. But also that delicate line, which the dream-picture must
not overstep--lest it act pathologically (in which case appearance,
being reality pure and simple, would impose upon us)--must not be
wanting in the picture of Apollo: that measured limitation, that
freedom from the wilder emotions, that philosophical calmness of the
sculptor-god. His eye must be "sunlike," according to his origin; even
when it is angry and looks displeased, the sacredness of his beauteous
appearance is still there. And so we might apply to Apollo, in an
eccentric sense, what Schopenhauer says of the man wrapt in the veil
of Mâyâ[2]: _Welt als Wille und Vorstellung,_ I. p. 416: "Just as in
a stormy sea, unbounded in every direction, rising and falling with
howling mountainous waves, a sailor sits in a boat and trusts in his
frail barque: so in the midst of a world of sorrows the individual sits
quietly supported by and trusting in his _principium individuationis_."
Indeed, we might say of Apollo, that in him the unshaken faith in
this _principium_ and the quiet sitting of the man wrapt therein have
received their sublimest expression; and we might even designate Apollo
as the glorious divine image of the _principium individuationis,_
from out of the gestures and looks of which all the joy and wisdom of
"appearance," together with its beauty, speak to us.

In the same work Schopenhauer has described to us the stupendous _awe_
which seizes upon man, when of a sudden he is at a loss to account for
the cognitive forms of a phenomenon, in that the principle of reason,
in some one of its manifestations, seems to admit of an exception.
Add to this awe the blissful ecstasy which rises from the innermost
depths of man, ay, of nature, at this same collapse of the _principium
individuationis,_ and we shall gain an insight into the being of
the _Dionysian,_ which is brought within closest ken perhaps by the
analogy of _drunkenness._ It is either under the influence of the
narcotic draught, of which the hymns of all primitive men and peoples
tell us, or by the powerful approach of spring penetrating all nature
with joy, that those Dionysian emotions awake, in the augmentation of
which the subjective vanishes to complete self-forgetfulness. So also
in the German Middle Ages singing and dancing crowds, ever increasing
in number, were borne from place to place under this same Dionysian
power. In these St. John's and St. Vitus's dancers we again perceive
the Bacchic choruses of the Greeks, with their previous history in Asia
Minor, as far back as Babylon and the orgiastic Sacæa. There are some,
who, from lack of experience or obtuseness, will turn away from such
phenomena as "folk-diseases" with a smile of contempt or pity prompted
by the consciousness of their own health: of course, the poor wretches
do not divine what a cadaverous-looking and ghastly aspect this very
"health" of theirs presents when the glowing life of the Dionysian
revellers rushes past them.

Under the charm of the Dionysian not only is the covenant between man
and man again established, but also estranged, hostile or subjugated
nature again celebrates her reconciliation with her lost son, man. Of
her own accord earth proffers her gifts, and peacefully the beasts of
prey approach from the desert and the rocks. The chariot of Dionysus is
bedecked with flowers and garlands: panthers and tigers pass beneath
his yoke. Change Beethoven's "jubilee-song" into a painting, and, if
your imagination be equal to the occasion when the awestruck millions
sink into the dust, you will then be able to approach the Dionysian.
Now is the slave a free man, now all the stubborn, hostile barriers,
which necessity, caprice, or "shameless fashion" has set up between
man and man, are broken down. Now, at the evangel of cosmic harmony,
each one feels himself not only united, reconciled, blended with
his neighbour, but as one with him, as if the veil of Mâyâ has been
torn and were now merely fluttering in tatters before the mysterious
Primordial Unity. In song and in dance man exhibits himself as a member
of a higher community, has forgotten how to walk and speak, and is on
the point of taking a dancing flight into the air. His gestures bespeak
enchantment. Even as the animals now talk, and as the earth yields milk
and honey, so also something super-natural sounds forth from him: he
feels himself a god, he himself now walks about enchanted and elated
even as the gods whom he saw walking about in his dreams. Man is no
longer an artist, he has become a work of art: the artistic power of
all nature here reveals itself in the tremors of drunkenness to the
highest gratification of the Primordial Unity. The noblest clay, the
costliest marble, namely man, is here kneaded and cut, and the chisel
strokes of the Dionysian world-artist are accompanied with the cry of
the Eleusinian mysteries: "Ihr stürzt nieder, Millionen? Ahnest du den
Schöpfer, Welt?"[3]


[1]

    My friend, just this is poet's task:
    His dreams to read and to unmask.
    Trust me, illusion's truths thrice sealed
    In dream to man will be revealed.
    All verse-craft and poetisation
    Is but soothdream interpretation.

[2] Cf. _World and Will as Idea,_ 1. 455 ff., trans, by
Haldane and Kemp.

[3]

    Ye bow in the dust, oh millions?
    Thy maker, mortal, dost divine?
Cf. Schiller's "Hymn to Joy"; and Beethoven, Ninth Symphony.--TR.





2.


Thus far we have considered the Apollonian and his antithesis,
the Dionysian, as artistic powers, which burst forth from nature
herself, _without the mediation of the human artist,_ and in which
her art-impulses are satisfied in the most immediate and direct way:
first, as the pictorial world of dreams, the perfection of which
has no connection whatever with the intellectual height or artistic
culture of the unit man, and again, as drunken reality, which likewise
does not heed the unit man, but even seeks to destroy the individual
and redeem him by a mystic feeling of Oneness. Anent these immediate
art-states of nature every artist is either an "imitator," to wit,
either an Apollonian, an artist in dreams, or a Dionysian, an artist
in ecstasies, or finally--as for instance in Greek tragedy--an artist
in both dreams and ecstasies: so we may perhaps picture him, as in
his Dionysian drunkenness and mystical self-abnegation, lonesome and
apart from the revelling choruses, he sinks down, and how now, through
Apollonian dream-inspiration, his own state, _i.e._, his oneness
with the primal source of the universe, reveals itself to him _in a
symbolical dream-picture_.

After these general premisings and contrastings, let us now approach
the _Greeks_ in order to learn in what degree and to what height
these _art-impulses of nature_ were developed in them: whereby
we shall be enabled to understand and appreciate more deeply the
relation of the Greek artist to his archetypes, or, according to the
Aristotelian expression, "the imitation of nature." In spite of all the
dream-literature and the numerous dream-anecdotes of the Greeks, we can
speak only conjecturally, though with a fair degree of certainty, of
their _dreams._ Considering the incredibly precise and unerring plastic
power of their eyes, as also their manifest and sincere delight in
colours, we can hardly refrain (to the shame of every one born later)
from assuming for their very dreams a logical causality of lines and
contours, colours and groups, a sequence of scenes resembling their
best reliefs, the perfection of which would certainly justify us, if a
comparison were possible, in designating the dreaming Greeks as Homers
and Homer as a dreaming Greek: in a deeper sense than when modern man,
in respect to his dreams, ventures to compare himself with Shakespeare.

On the other hand, we should not have to speak conjecturally, if asked
to disclose the immense gap which separated the _Dionysian Greek_ from
the Dionysian barbarian. From all quarters of the Ancient World--to
say nothing of the modern--from Rome as far as Babylon, we can prove
the existence of Dionysian festivals, the type of which bears, at
best, the same relation to the Greek festivals as the bearded satyr,
who borrowed his name and attributes from the goat, does to Dionysus
himself. In nearly every instance the centre of these festivals lay
in extravagant sexual licentiousness, the waves of which overwhelmed
all family life and its venerable traditions; the very wildest beasts
of nature were let loose here, including that detestable mixture of
lust and cruelty which has always seemed to me the genuine "witches'
draught." For some time, however, it would seem that the Greeks
were perfectly secure and guarded against the feverish agitations
of these festivals (--the knowledge of which entered Greece by all
the channels of land and sea) by the figure of Apollo himself rising
here in full pride, who could not have held out the Gorgon's head to
a more dangerous power than this grotesquely uncouth Dionysian. It
is in Doric art that this majestically-rejecting attitude of Apollo
perpetuated itself. This opposition became more precarious and even
impossible, when, from out of the deepest root of the Hellenic nature,
similar impulses finally broke forth and made way for themselves:
the Delphic god, by a seasonably effected reconciliation, was now
contented with taking the destructive arms from the hands of his
powerful antagonist. This reconciliation marks the most important
moment in the history of the Greek cult: wherever we turn our eyes
we may observe the revolutions resulting from this event. It was
the reconciliation of two antagonists, with the sharp demarcation
of the boundary-lines to be thenceforth observed by each, and with
periodical transmission of testimonials;--in reality, the chasm was
not bridged over. But if we observe how, under the pressure of this
conclusion of peace, the Dionysian power manifested itself, we shall
now recognise in the Dionysian orgies of the Greeks, as compared with
the Babylonian Sacæa and their retrogression of man to the tiger and
the ape, the significance of festivals of world-redemption and days of
transfiguration. Not till then does nature attain her artistic jubilee;
not till then does the rupture of the _principium individuationis_
become an artistic phenomenon. That horrible "witches' draught" of
sensuality and cruelty was here powerless: only the curious blending
and duality in the emotions of the Dionysian revellers reminds one of
it--just as medicines remind one of deadly poisons,--that phenomenon,
to wit, that pains beget joy, that jubilation wrings painful sounds out
of the breast. From the highest joy sounds the cry of horror or the
yearning wail over an irretrievable loss. In these Greek festivals a
sentimental trait, as it were, breaks forth from nature, as if she must
sigh over her dismemberment into individuals. The song and pantomime
of such dually-minded revellers was something new and unheard-of in
the Homeric-Grecian world; and the Dionysian _music_ in particular
excited awe and horror. If music, as it would seem, was previously
known as an Apollonian art, it was, strictly speaking, only as the
wave-beat of rhythm, the formative power of which was developed to
the representation of Apollonian conditions. The music of Apollo was
Doric architectonics in tones, but in merely suggested tones, such
as those of the cithara. The very element which forms the essence of
Dionysian music (and hence of music in general) is carefully excluded
as un-Apollonian; namely, the thrilling power of the tone, the uniform
stream of the melos, and the thoroughly incomparable world of harmony.
In the Dionysian dithyramb man is incited to the highest exaltation
of all his symbolic faculties; something never before experienced
struggles for utterance--the annihilation of the veil of Mâyâ, Oneness
as genius of the race, ay, of nature. The essence of nature is now
to be expressed symbolically; a new world of symbols is required;
for once the entire symbolism of the body, not only the symbolism of
the lips, face, and speech, but the whole pantomime of dancing which
sets all the members into rhythmical motion. Thereupon the other
symbolic powers, those of music, in rhythmics, dynamics, and harmony,
suddenly become impetuous. To comprehend this collective discharge
of all the symbolic powers, a man must have already attained that
height of self-abnegation, which wills to express itself symbolically
through these powers: the Dithyrambic votary of Dionysus is therefore
understood only by those like himself! With what astonishment must the
Apollonian Greek have beheld him! With an astonishment, which was all
the greater the more it was mingled with the shuddering suspicion that
all this was in reality not so very foreign to him, yea, that, like
unto a veil, his Apollonian consciousness only hid this Dionysian world
from his view.



3.


In order to comprehend this, we must take down the artistic structure,
of the _Apollonian culture,_ as it were, stone by stone, till we behold
the foundations on which it rests. Here we observe first of all the
glorious _Olympian_ figures of the gods, standing on the gables of this
structure, whose deeds, represented in far-shining reliefs, adorn its
friezes. Though Apollo stands among them as an individual deity, side
by side with others, and without claim to priority of rank, we must not
suffer this fact to mislead us. The same impulse which embodied itself
in Apollo has, in general, given birth to this whole Olympian world,
and in this sense we may regard Apollo as the father thereof. What was
the enormous need from which proceeded such an illustrious group of
Olympian beings?

Whosoever, with another religion in his heart, approaches these
Olympians and seeks among them for moral elevation, even for sanctity,
for incorporeal spiritualisation, for sympathetic looks of love, will
soon be obliged to turn his back on them, discouraged and disappointed.
Here nothing suggests asceticism, spirituality, or duty: here only
an exuberant, even triumphant life speaks to us, in which everything
existing is deified, whether good or bad. And so the spectator will
perhaps stand quite bewildered before this fantastic exuberance of
life, and ask himself what magic potion these madly merry men could
have used for enjoying life, so that, wherever they turned their eyes,
Helena, the ideal image of their own existence "floating in sweet
sensuality," smiled upon them. But to this spectator, already turning
backwards, we must call out: "depart not hence, but hear rather what
Greek folk-wisdom says of this same life, which with such inexplicable
cheerfulness spreads out before thee." There is an ancient story that
king Midas hunted in the forest a long time for the wise _Silenus,_
the companion of Dionysus, without capturing him. When at last he fell
into his hands, the king asked what was best of all and most desirable
for man. Fixed and immovable, the demon remained silent; till at last,
forced by the king, he broke out with shrill laughter into these words:
"Oh, wretched race of a day, children of chance and misery, why do ye
compel me to say to you what it were most expedient for you not to
hear? What is best of all is for ever beyond your reach: not to be
born, not to _be_, to be _nothing._ The second best for you, however,
is soon to die."

How is the Olympian world of deities related to this folk-wisdom? Even
as the rapturous vision of the tortured martyr to his sufferings.

Now the Olympian magic mountain opens, as it were, to our view and
shows to us its roots. The Greek knew and felt the terrors and horrors
of existence: to be able to live at all, he had to interpose the
shining dream-birth of the Olympian world between himself and them.
The excessive distrust of the titanic powers of nature, the Moira
throning inexorably over all knowledge, the vulture of the great
philanthropist Prometheus, the terrible fate of the wise Œdipus, the
family curse of the Atridæ which drove Orestes to matricide; in short,
that entire philosophy of the sylvan god, with its mythical exemplars,
which wrought the ruin of the melancholy Etruscans--was again and again
surmounted anew by the Greeks through the artistic _middle world_ of
the Olympians, or at least veiled and withdrawn from sight. To be able
to live, the Greeks had, from direst necessity, to create these gods:
which process we may perhaps picture to ourselves in this manner: that
out of the original Titan thearchy of terror the Olympian thearchy of
joy was evolved, by slow transitions, through the Apollonian impulse to
beauty, even as roses break forth from thorny bushes. How else could
this so sensitive people, so vehement in its desires, so singularly
qualified for _sufferings_ have endured existence, if it had not been
exhibited to them in their gods, surrounded with a higher glory?
The same impulse which calls art into being, as the complement and
consummation of existence, seducing to a continuation of life, caused
also the Olympian world to arise, in which the Hellenic "will" held
up before itself a transfiguring mirror. Thus do the gods justify the
life of man, in that they themselves live it--the only satisfactory
Theodicy! Existence under the bright sunshine of such gods is regarded
as that which is desirable in itself, and the real _grief_ of the
Homeric men has reference to parting from it, especially to early
parting: so that we might now say of them, with a reversion of the
Silenian wisdom, that "to die early is worst of all for them, the
second worst is--some day to die at all." If once the lamentation is
heard, it will ring out again, of the short-lived Achilles, of the
leaf-like change and vicissitude of the human race, of the decay of
the heroic age. It is not unworthy of the greatest hero to long for a
continuation of life, ay, even as a day-labourer. So vehemently does
the "will," at the Apollonian stage of development, long for this
existence, so completely at one does the Homeric man feel himself with
it, that the very lamentation becomes its song of praise.

Here we must observe that this harmony which is so eagerly contemplated
by modern man, in fact, this oneness of man with nature, to express
which Schiller introduced the technical term "naïve," is by no means
such a simple, naturally resulting and, as it were, inevitable
condition, which _must_ be found at the gate of every culture leading
to a paradise of man: this could be believed only by an age which
sought to picture to itself Rousseau's Émile also as an artist,
and imagined it had found in Homer such an artist Émile, reared at
Nature's bosom. Wherever we meet with the "naïve" in art, it behoves
us to recognise the highest effect of the Apollonian culture, which
in the first place has always to overthrow some Titanic empire and
slay monsters, and which, through powerful dazzling representations
and pleasurable illusions, must have triumphed over a terrible depth
of world-contemplation and a most keen susceptibility to suffering.
But how seldom is the naïve--that complete absorption, in the beauty
of appearance--attained! And hence how inexpressibly sublime is
_Homer,_ who, as unit being, bears the same relation to this Apollonian
folk-culture as the unit dream-artist does to the dream-faculty of
the people and of Nature in general. The Homeric "naïveté" can be
comprehended only as the complete triumph of the Apollonian illusion:
it is the same kind of illusion as Nature so frequently employs to
compass her ends. The true goal is veiled by a phantasm: we stretch out
our hands for the latter, while Nature attains the former through our
illusion. In the Greeks the "will" desired to contemplate itself in the
transfiguration of the genius and the world of art; in order to glorify
themselves, its creatures had to feel themselves worthy of glory;
they had to behold themselves again in a higher sphere, without this
consummate world of contemplation acting as an imperative or reproach.
Such is the sphere of beauty, in which, as in a mirror, they saw their
images, the Olympians. With this mirroring of beauty the Hellenic will
combated its talent--correlative to the artistic--for suffering and for
the wisdom of suffering: and, as a monument of its victory, Homer, the
naïve artist, stands before us.



4.


Concerning this naïve artist the analogy of dreams will enlighten us to
some extent. When we realise to ourselves the dreamer, as, in the midst
of the illusion of the dream-world and without disturbing it, he calls
out to himself: "it is a dream, I will dream on"; when we must thence
infer a deep inner joy in dream-contemplation; when, on the other hand,
to be at all able to dream with this inner joy in contemplation, we
must have completely forgotten the day and its terrible obtrusiveness,
we may, under the direction of the dream-reading Apollo, interpret
all these phenomena to ourselves somewhat as follows. Though it is
certain that of the two halves of life, the waking and the dreaming,
the former appeals to us as by far the more preferred, important,
excellent and worthy of being lived, indeed, as that which alone is
lived: yet, with reference to that mysterious ground of our being of
which we are the phenomenon, I should, paradoxical as it may seem, be
inclined to maintain the very opposite estimate of the value of dream
life. For the more clearly I perceive in nature those all-powerful art
impulses, and in them a fervent longing for appearance, for redemption
through appearance, the more I feel myself driven to the metaphysical
assumption that the Verily-Existent and Primordial Unity, as the
Eternally Suffering and Self-Contradictory, requires the rapturous
vision, the joyful appearance, for its continuous salvation: which
appearance we, who are completely wrapt in it and composed of it, must
regard as the Verily Non-existent,--_i.e.,_ as a perpetual unfolding
in time, space and causality,--in other words, as empiric reality.
If we therefore waive the consideration of our own "reality" for the
present, if we conceive our empiric existence, and that of the world
generally, as a representation of the Primordial Unity generated every
moment, we shall then have to regard the dream as an _appearance of
appearance,_ hence as a still higher gratification of the primordial
desire for appearance. It is for this same reason that the innermost
heart of Nature experiences that indescribable joy in the naïve artist
and in the naïve work of art, which is likewise only "an appearance of
appearance." In a symbolic painting, _Raphael_, himself one of these
immortal "naïve" ones, has represented to us this depotentiating of
appearance to appearance, the primordial process of the naïve artist
and at the same time of Apollonian culture. In his _Transfiguration,_
the lower half, with the possessed boy, the despairing bearers, the
helpless, terrified disciples, shows to us the reflection of eternal
primordial pain, the sole basis of the world: the "appearance" here
is the counter-appearance of eternal Contradiction, the father of
things. Out of this appearance then arises, like an ambrosial vapour, a
visionlike new world of appearances, of which those wrapt in the first
appearance see nothing--a radiant floating in purest bliss and painless
Contemplation beaming from wide-open eyes. Here there is presented to
our view, in the highest symbolism of art, that Apollonian world of
beauty and its substratum, the terrible wisdom of Silenus, and we
comprehend, by intuition, their necessary interdependence. Apollo,
however, again appears to us as the apotheosis of the _principium
individuationis,_ in which alone the perpetually attained end of the
Primordial Unity, its redemption through appearance, is consummated: he
shows us, with sublime attitudes, how the entire world of torment is
necessary, that thereby the individual may be impelled to realise the
redeeming vision, and then, sunk in contemplation thereof, quietly sit
in his fluctuating barque, in the midst of the sea.

This apotheosis of individuation, if it be at all conceived as
imperative and laying down precepts, knows but one law--the individual,
_i.e.,_ the observance of the boundaries of the individual,
_measure_ in the Hellenic sense. Apollo, as ethical deity, demands
due proportion of his disciples, and, that this may be observed, he
demands self-knowledge. And thus, parallel to the æsthetic necessity
for beauty, there run the demands "know thyself" and "not too much,"
while presumption and undueness are regarded as the truly hostile
demons of the non-Apollonian sphere, hence as characteristics of the
pre-Apollonian age, that of the Titans, and of the extra-Apollonian
world, that of the barbarians. Because of his Titan-like love for
man, Prometheus had to be torn to pieces by vultures; because of his
excessive wisdom, which solved the riddle of the Sphinx, Œdipus had
to plunge into a bewildering vortex of monstrous crimes: thus did the
Delphic god interpret the Grecian past.

So also the effects wrought by the _Dionysian_ appeared "titanic" and
"barbaric" to the Apollonian Greek: while at the same time he could
not conceal from himself that he too was inwardly related to these
overthrown Titans and heroes. Indeed, he had to recognise still more
than this: his entire existence, with all its beauty and moderation,
rested on a hidden substratum of suffering and of knowledge, which
was again disclosed to him by the Dionysian. And lo! Apollo could not
live without Dionysus! The "titanic" and the "barbaric" were in the
end not less necessary than the Apollonian. And now let us imagine to
ourselves how the ecstatic tone of the Dionysian festival sounded in
ever more luring and bewitching strains into this artificially confined
world built on appearance and moderation, how in these strains all
the _undueness_ of nature, in joy, sorrow, and knowledge, even to
the transpiercing shriek, became audible: let us ask ourselves what
meaning could be attached to the psalmodising artist of Apollo, with
the phantom harp-sound, as compared with this demonic folk-song! The
muses of the arts of "appearance" paled before an art which, in its
intoxication, spoke the truth, the wisdom of Silenus cried "woe! woe!"
against the cheerful Olympians. The individual, with all his boundaries
and due proportions, went under in the self-oblivion of the Dionysian
states and forgot the Apollonian precepts. The _Undueness_ revealed
itself as truth, contradiction, the bliss born of pain, declared itself
but of the heart of nature. And thus, wherever the Dionysian prevailed,
the Apollonian was routed and annihilated. But it is quite as certain
that, where the first assault was successfully withstood, the authority
and majesty of the Delphic god exhibited itself as more rigid and
menacing than ever. For I can only explain to myself the _Doric_ state
and Doric art as a permanent war-camp of the Apollonian: only by
incessant opposition to the titanic-barbaric nature of the Dionysian
was it possible for an art so defiantly-prim, so encompassed with
bulwarks, a training so warlike and rigorous, a constitution so cruel
and relentless, to last for any length of time.

Up to this point we have enlarged upon the observation made at the
beginning of this essay: how the Dionysian and the Apollonian, in ever
new births succeeding and mutually augmenting one another, controlled
the Hellenic genius: how from out the age of "bronze," with its Titan
struggles and rigorous folk-philosophy, the Homeric world develops
under the fostering sway of the Apollonian impulse to beauty, how this
"naïve" splendour is again overwhelmed by the inbursting flood of the
Dionysian, and how against this new power the Apollonian rises to the
austere majesty of Doric art and the Doric view of things. If, then,
in this way, in the strife of these two hostile principles, the older
Hellenic history falls into four great periods of art, we are now
driven to inquire after the ulterior purpose of these unfoldings and
processes, unless perchance we should regard the last-attained period,
the period of Doric art, as the end and aim of these artistic impulses:
and here the sublime and highly celebrated art-work of _Attic tragedy_
and dramatic dithyramb presents itself to our view as the common
goal of both these impulses, whose mysterious union, after many and
long precursory struggles, found its glorious consummation in such a
child,--which is at once Antigone and Cassandra.



5.


We now approach the real purpose of our investigation, which aims
at acquiring a knowledge of the Dionyso-Apollonian genius and his
art-work, or at least an anticipatory understanding of the mystery of
the aforesaid union. Here we shall ask first of all where that new
germ which subsequently developed into tragedy and dramatic dithyramb
first makes itself perceptible in the Hellenic world. The ancients
themselves supply the answer in symbolic form, when they place _Homer_
and _Archilochus_ as the forefathers and torch-bearers of Greek poetry
side by side on gems, sculptures, etc., in the sure conviction that
only these two thoroughly original compeers, from whom a stream of
fire flows over the whole of Greek posterity, should be taken into
consideration. Homer, the aged dreamer sunk in himself, the type
of the Apollonian naïve artist, beholds now with astonishment the
impassioned genius of the warlike votary of the muses, Archilochus,
violently tossed to and fro on the billows of existence: and modern
æsthetics could only add by way of interpretation, that here the
"objective" artist is confronted by the first "subjective" artist.
But this interpretation is of little service to us, because we know
the subjective artist only as the poor artist, and in every type and
elevation of art we demand specially and first of all the conquest
of the Subjective, the redemption from the "ego" and the cessation
of every individual will and desire; indeed, we find it impossible
to believe in any truly artistic production, however insignificant,
without objectivity, without pure, interestless contemplation. Hence
our æsthetics must first solve the problem as to how the "lyrist" is
possible as an artist: he who according to the experience of all ages
continually says "I" and sings off to us the entire chromatic scale of
his passions and desires. This very Archilochus appals us, alongside
of Homer, by his cries of hatred and scorn, by the drunken outbursts
of his desire. Is not just he then, who has been called the first
subjective artist, the non-artist proper? But whence then the reverence
which was shown to him--the poet--in very remarkable utterances by the
Delphic oracle itself, the focus of "objective" art?

_Schiller_ has enlightened us concerning his poetic procedure by a
psychological observation, inexplicable to himself, yet not apparently
open to any objection. He acknowledges that as the preparatory state
to the act of poetising he had not perhaps before him or within him a
series of pictures with co-ordinate causality of thoughts, but rather
a _musical mood_ ("The perception with me is at first without a clear
and definite object; this forms itself later. A certain musical mood
of mind precedes, and only after this does the poetical idea follow
with me.") Add to this the most important phenomenon of all ancient
lyric poetry, _the union,_ regarded everywhere as natural, _of the
lyrist with the musician,_ their very identity, indeed,--compared
with which our modern lyric poetry is like the statue of a god without
a head,--and we may now, on the basis of our metaphysics of æsthetics
set forth above, interpret the lyrist to ourselves as follows. As
Dionysian artist he is in the first place become altogether one with
the Primordial Unity, its pain and contradiction, and he produces the
copy of this Primordial Unity as music, granting that music has been
correctly termed a repetition and a recast of the world; but now, under
the Apollonian dream-inspiration, this music again becomes visible
to him as in a _symbolic dream-picture._ The formless and intangible
reflection of the primordial pain in music, with its redemption in
appearance, then generates a second mirroring as a concrete symbol or
example. The artist has already surrendered his subjectivity in the
Dionysian process: the picture which now shows to him his oneness with
the heart of the world, is a dream-scene, which embodies the primordial
contradiction and primordial pain, together with the primordial joy, of
appearance. The "I" of the lyrist sounds therefore from the abyss of
being: its "subjectivity," in the sense of the modern æsthetes, is a
fiction. When Archilochus, the first lyrist of the Greeks, makes known
both his mad love and his contempt to the daughters of Lycambes, it is
not his passion which dances before us in orgiastic frenzy: we see
Dionysus and the Mænads, we see the drunken reveller Archilochus sunk
down to sleep--as Euripides depicts it in the Bacchæ, the sleep on the
high Alpine pasture, in the noonday sun:--and now Apollo approaches and
touches him with the laurel. The Dionyso-musical enchantment of the
sleeper now emits, as it were, picture sparks, lyrical poems, which in
their highest development are called tragedies and dramatic dithyrambs.

The plastic artist, as also the epic poet, who is related to him, is
sunk in the pure contemplation of pictures. The Dionysian musician
is, without any picture, himself just primordial pain and the
primordial re-echoing thereof. The lyric genius is conscious of a
world of pictures and symbols--growing out of the state of mystical
self-abnegation and oneness,--which has a colouring causality and
velocity quite different from that of the world of the plastic artist
and epic poet. While the latter lives in these pictures, and only in
them, with joyful satisfaction, and never grows tired of contemplating
them with love, even in their minutest characters, while even the
picture of the angry Achilles is to him but a picture, the angry
expression of which he enjoys with the dream-joy in appearance--so
that, by this mirror of appearance, he is guarded against being unified
and blending with his figures;--the pictures of the lyrist on the other
hand are nothing but _his very_ self and, as it were, only different
projections of himself, on account of which he as the moving centre
of this world is entitled to say "I": only of course this self is
not the same as that of the waking, empirically real man, but the
only verily existent and eternal self resting at the basis of things,
by means of the images whereof the lyric genius sees through even to
this basis of things. Now let us suppose that he beholds _himself_
also among these images as non-genius, _i.e.,_ his subject, the whole
throng of subjective passions and impulses of the will directed to a
definite object which appears real to him; if now it seems as if the
lyric genius and the allied non-genius were one, and as if the former
spoke that little word "I" of his own accord, this appearance will no
longer be able to lead us astray, as it certainly led those astray who
designated the lyrist as the subjective poet. In truth, Archilochus,
the passionately inflamed, loving and hating man, is but a vision of
the genius, who by this time is no longer Archilochus, but a genius
of the world, who expresses his primordial pain symbolically in the
figure of the man Archilochus: while the subjectively willing and
desiring man, Archilochus, can never at any time be a poet. It is by no
means necessary, however, that the lyrist should see nothing but the
phenomenon of the man Archilochus before him as a reflection of eternal
being; and tragedy shows how far the visionary world of the lyrist may
depart from this phenomenon, to which, of course, it is most intimately
related.

_Schopenhauer,_ who did not shut his eyes to the difficulty presented
by the lyrist in the philosophical contemplation of art, thought he
had found a way out of it, on which, however, I cannot accompany him;
while he alone, in his profound metaphysics of music, held in his
hands the means whereby this difficulty could be definitely removed:
as I believe I have removed it here in his spirit and to his honour.
In contrast to our view, he describes the peculiar nature of song
as follows[4] (_Welt als Wille und Vorstellung,_ I. 295):--"It is
the subject of the will, _i.e.,_ his own volition, which fills the
consciousness of the singer; often as an unbound and satisfied desire
(joy), but still more often as a restricted desire (grief), always as
an emotion, a passion, or an agitated frame of mind. Besides this,
however, and along with it, by the sight of surrounding nature, the
singer becomes conscious of himself as the subject of pure will-less
knowing, the unbroken, blissful peace of which now appears, in contrast
to the stress of desire, which is always restricted and always needy.
The feeling of this contrast, this alternation, is really what the
song as a whole expresses and what principally constitutes the lyrical
state of mind. In it pure knowing comes to us as it were to deliver us
from desire and the stress thereof: we follow, but only for an instant;
for desire, the remembrance of our personal ends, tears us anew from
peaceful contemplation; yet ever again the next beautiful surrounding
in which the pure will-less knowledge presents itself to us, allures
us away from desire. Therefore, in song and in the lyrical mood,
desire (the personal interest of the ends) and the pure perception of
the surrounding which presents itself, are wonderfully mingled with
each other; connections between them are sought for and imagined; the
subjective disposition, the affection of the will, imparts its own
hue to the contemplated surrounding, and conversely, the surroundings
communicate the reflex of their colour to the will. The true song is
the expression of the whole of this mingled and divided state of mind."

Who could fail to see in this description that lyric poetry is here
characterised as an imperfectly attained art, which seldom and only
as it were in leaps arrives at its goal, indeed, as a semi-art, the
essence of which is said to consist in this, that desire and pure
contemplation, _i.e.,_ the unæsthetic and the æsthetic condition, are
wonderfully mingled with each other? We maintain rather, that this
entire antithesis, according to which, as according to some standard
of value, Schopenhauer, too, still classifies the arts, the antithesis
between the subjective and the objective, is quite out of place in
æsthetics, inasmuch as the subject _i.e.,_ the desiring individual who
furthers his own egoistic ends, can be conceived only as the adversary,
not as the origin of art. In so far as the subject is the artist,
however, he has already been released from his individual will, and has
become as it were the medium, through which the one verily existent
Subject celebrates his redemption in appearance. For this one thing
must above all be clear to us, to our humiliation _and_ exaltation,
that the entire comedy of art is not at all performed, say, for our
betterment and culture, and that we are just as little the true authors
of this art-world: rather we may assume with regard to ourselves, that
its true author uses us as pictures and artistic projections, and that
we have our highest dignity in our significance as works of art--for
only as an _æsthetic phenomenon_ is existence and the world eternally
_justified:_--while of course our consciousness of this our specific
significance hardly differs from the kind of consciousness which the
soldiers painted on canvas have of the battle represented thereon.
Hence all our knowledge of art is at bottom quite illusory, because, as
knowing persons we are not one and identical with the Being who, as the
sole author and spectator of this comedy of art, prepares a perpetual
entertainment for himself. Only in so far as the genius in the act of
artistic production coalesces with this primordial artist of the world,
does he get a glimpse of the eternal essence of art, for in this state
he is, in a marvellous manner, like the weird picture of the fairy-tale
which can at will turn its eyes and behold itself; he is now at once
subject and object, at once poet, actor, and spectator.


[4] _World as Will and Idea,_ I. 323, 4th ed. of Haldane and
Kemp's translation. Quoted with a few changes.



6.


With reference to Archilochus, it has been established by critical
research that he introduced the _folk-song_ into literature, and,
on account thereof, deserved, according to the general estimate of
the Greeks, his unique position alongside of Homer. But what is this
popular folk-song in contrast to the wholly Apollonian epos? What
else but the _perpetuum vestigium_ of a union of the Apollonian and
the Dionysian? Its enormous diffusion among all peoples, still further
enhanced by ever new births, testifies to the power of this artistic
double impulse of nature: which leaves its vestiges in the popular
song in like manner as the orgiastic movements of a people perpetuate
themselves in its music. Indeed, one might also furnish historical
proofs, that every period which is highly productive in popular songs
has been most violently stirred by Dionysian currents, which we must
always regard as the substratum and prerequisite of the popular song.

First of all, however, we regard the popular song as the musical mirror
of the world, as the Original melody, which now seeks for itself a
parallel dream-phenomenon and expresses it in poetry. _Melody is
therefore primary and universal,_ and as such may admit of several
objectivations, in several texts. Likewise, in the naïve estimation of
the people, it is regarded as by far the more important and necessary.
Melody generates the poem out of itself by an ever-recurring process.
_The strophic form of the popular song_ points to the same phenomenon,
which I always beheld with astonishment, till at last I found this
explanation. Any one who in accordance with this theory examines a
collection of popular songs, such as "Des Knaben Wunderhorn," will find
innumerable instances of the perpetually productive melody scattering
picture sparks all around: which in their variegation, their abrupt
change, their mad precipitance, manifest a power quite unknown to the
epic appearance and its steady flow. From the point of view of the
epos, this unequal and irregular pictorial world of lyric poetry must
be simply condemned: and the solemn epic rhapsodists of the Apollonian
festivals in the age of Terpander have certainly done so.

Accordingly, we observe that in the poetising of the popular song,
language is strained to its utmost _to imitate music;_ and hence a
new world of poetry begins with Archilochus, which is fundamentally
opposed to the Homeric. And in saying this we have pointed out the
only possible relation between poetry and music, between word and
tone: the word, the picture, the concept here seeks an expression
analogous to music and now experiences in itself the power of music.
In this sense we may discriminate between two main currents in the
history of the language of the Greek people, according as their
language imitated either the world of phenomena and of pictures, or the
world of music. One has only to reflect seriously on the linguistic
difference with regard to colour, syntactical structure, and vocabulary
in Homer and Pindar, in order to comprehend the significance of this
contrast; indeed, it becomes palpably clear to us that in the period
between Homer and Pindar the _orgiastic flute tones of Olympus_ must
have sounded forth, which, in an age as late as Aristotle's, when
music was infinitely more developed, transported people to drunken
enthusiasm, and which, when their influence was first felt, undoubtedly
incited all the poetic means of expression of contemporaneous man
to imitation. I here call attention to a familiar phenomenon of our
own times, against which our æsthetics raises many objections. We
again and again have occasion to observe how a symphony of Beethoven
compels the individual hearers to use figurative speech, though the
appearance presented by a collocation of the different pictorial
world generated by a piece of music may be never so fantastically
diversified and even contradictory. To practise its small wit on such
compositions, and to overlook a phenomenon which is certainly worth
explaining, is quite in keeping with this æsthetics. Indeed, even if
the tone-poet has spoken in pictures concerning a composition, when for
instance he designates a certain symphony as the "pastoral" symphony,
or a passage therein as "the scene by the brook," or another as the
"merry gathering of rustics," these are likewise only symbolical
representations born out of music--and not perhaps the imitated objects
of music--representations which can give us no information whatever
concerning the _Dionysian_ content of music, and which in fact have
no distinctive value of their own alongside of other pictorical
expressions. This process of a discharge of music in pictures we have
now to transfer to some youthful, linguistically productive people, to
get a notion as to how the strophic popular song originates, and how
the entire faculty of speech is stimulated by this new principle of
imitation of music.

If, therefore, we may regard lyric poetry as the effulguration of
music in pictures and concepts, we can now ask: "how does music
_appear_ in the mirror of symbolism and conception?" _It appears as
will,_ taking the word in the Schopenhauerian sense, _i.e.,_ as the
antithesis of the æsthetic, purely contemplative, and passive frame
of mind. Here, however, we must discriminate as sharply as possible
between the concept of essentiality and the concept of phenominality;
for music, according to its essence, cannot be will, because as such it
would have to be wholly banished from the domain of art--for the will
is the unæsthetic-in-itself;--yet it appears as will. For in order to
express the phenomenon of music in pictures, the lyrist requires all
the stirrings of passion, from the whispering of infant desire to the
roaring of madness. Under the impulse to speak of music in Apollonian
symbols, he conceives of all nature, and himself therein, only as the
eternally willing, desiring, longing existence. But in so far as he
interprets music by means of pictures, he himself rests in the quiet
calm of Apollonian contemplation, however much all around him which
he beholds through the medium of music is in a state of confused and
violent motion. Indeed, when he beholds himself through this same
medium, his own image appears to him in a state of unsatisfied feeling:
his own willing, longing, moaning and rejoicing are to him symbols by
which he interprets music. Such is the phenomenon of the lyrist: as
Apollonian genius he interprets music through the image of the will,
while he himself, completely released from the avidity of the will, is
the pure, undimmed eye of day.

Our whole disquisition insists on this, that lyric poetry is dependent
on the spirit of music just as music itself in its absolute sovereignty
does not _require_ the picture and the concept, but only _endures_
them as accompaniments. The poems of the lyrist can express nothing
which has not already been contained in the vast universality and
absoluteness of the music which compelled him to use figurative
speech. By no means is it possible for language adequately to render
the cosmic symbolism of music, for the very reason that music stands
in symbolic relation to the primordial contradiction and primordial
pain in the heart of the Primordial Unity, and therefore symbolises a
sphere which is above all appearance and before all phenomena. Rather
should we say that all phenomena, compared with it, are but symbols:
hence _language,_ as the organ and symbol of phenomena, cannot at all
disclose the innermost essence, of music; language can only be in
superficial contact with music when it attempts to imitate music; while
the profoundest significance of the latter cannot be brought one step
nearer to us by all the eloquence of lyric poetry.



7.


We shall now have to avail ourselves of all the principles of art
hitherto considered, in order to find our way through the labyrinth,
as we must designate _the origin of Greek tragedy._ I shall not be
charged with absurdity in saying that the problem of this origin has
as yet not even been seriously stated, not to say solved, however
often the fluttering tatters of ancient tradition have been sewed
together in sundry combinations and torn asunder again. This tradition
tells us in the most unequivocal terms, _that tragedy sprang from the
tragic chorus,_ and was originally only chorus and nothing but chorus:
and hence we feel it our duty to look into the heart of this tragic
chorus as being the real proto-drama, without in the least contenting
ourselves with current art-phraseology--according to which the chorus
is the ideal spectator, or represents the people in contrast to the
regal side of the scene. The latter explanatory notion, which sounds
sublime to many a politician--that the immutable moral law was embodied
by the democratic Athenians in the popular chorus, which always carries
its point over the passionate excesses and extravagances of kings--may
be ever so forcibly suggested by an observation of Aristotle: still
it has no bearing on the original formation of tragedy, inasmuch
as the entire antithesis of king and people, and, in general, the
whole politico-social sphere, is excluded from the purely religious
beginnings of tragedy; but, considering the well-known classical
form of the chorus in Æschylus and Sophocles, we should even deem
it blasphemy to speak here of the anticipation of a "constitutional
representation of the people," from which blasphemy others have not
shrunk, however. The ancient governments knew of no constitutional
representation of the people _in praxi,_ and it is to be hoped that
they did not even so much as "anticipate" it in tragedy.

Much more celebrated than this political explanation of the chorus is
the notion of A. W. Schlegel, who advises us to regard the chorus, in
a manner, as the essence and extract of the crowd of spectators,--as
the "ideal spectator." This view when compared with the historical
tradition that tragedy was originally only chorus, reveals itself
in its true character, as a crude, unscientific, yet brilliant
assertion, which, however, has acquired its brilliancy only through
its concentrated form of expression, through the truly Germanic bias
in favour of whatever is called "ideal," and through our momentary
astonishment. For we are indeed astonished the moment we compare our
well-known theatrical public with this chorus, and ask ourselves if it
could ever be possible to idealise something analogous to the Greek
chorus out of such a public. We tacitly deny this, and now wonder
as much at the boldness of Schlegel's assertion as at the totally
different nature of the Greek public. For hitherto we always believed
that the true spectator, be he who he may, had always to remain
conscious of having before him a work of art, and not an empiric
reality: whereas the tragic chorus of the Greeks is compelled to
recognise real beings in the figures of the stage. The chorus of the
Oceanides really believes that it sees before it the Titan Prometheus,
and considers itself as real as the god of the scene. And are we to
own that he is the highest and purest type of spectator, who, like the
Oceanides, regards Prometheus as real and present in body? And is it
characteristic of the ideal spectator that he should run on the stage
and free the god from his torments? We had believed in an æsthetic
public, and considered the individual spectator the better qualified
the more he was capable of viewing a work of art as art, that is,
æsthetically; but now the Schlegelian expression has intimated to us,
that the perfect ideal spectator does not at all suffer the world of
the scenes to act æsthetically on him, but corporeo-empirically. Oh,
these Greeks! we have sighed; they will upset our æsthetics! But once
accustomed to it, we have reiterated the saying of Schlegel, as often
as the subject of the chorus has been broached.

But the tradition which is so explicit here speaks against Schlegel:
the chorus as such, without the stage,--the primitive form of
tragedy,--and the chorus of ideal spectators do not harmonise. What
kind of art would that be which was extracted from the concept of the
spectator, and whereof we are to regard the "spectator as such" as the
true form? The spectator without the play is something absurd. We fear
that the birth of tragedy can be explained neither by the high esteem
for the moral intelligence of the multitude nor by the concept of the
spectator without the play; and we regard the problem as too deep to be
even so much as touched by such superficial modes of contemplation.

An infinitely more valuable insight into the signification of the
chorus had already been displayed by Schiller in the celebrated Preface
to his Bride of Messina, where he regarded the chorus as a living wall
which tragedy draws round herself to guard her from contact with the
world of reality, and to preserve her ideal domain and poetical freedom.

It is with this, his chief weapon, that Schiller combats the ordinary
conception of the natural, the illusion ordinarily required in
dramatic poetry. He contends that while indeed the day on the stage is
merely artificial, the architecture only symbolical, and the metrical
dialogue purely ideal in character, nevertheless an erroneous view
still prevails in the main: that it is not enough to tolerate merely
as a poetical license _that_ which is in reality the essence of all
poetry. The introduction of the chorus is, he says, the decisive step
by which war is declared openly and honestly against all naturalism
in art.--It is, methinks, for disparaging this mode of contemplation
that our would-be superior age has coined the disdainful catchword
"pseudo-idealism." I fear, however, that we on the other hand with our
present worship of the natural and the real have landed at the nadir
of all idealism, namely in the region of cabinets of wax-figures. An
art indeed exists also here, as in certain novels much in vogue at
present: but let no one pester us with the claim that by this art the
Schiller-Goethian "Pseudo-idealism" has been vanquished.

It is indeed an "ideal" domain, as Schiller rightly perceived,
upon--which the Greek satyric chorus, the chorus of primitive tragedy,
was wont to walk, a domain raised far above the actual path of
mortals. The Greek framed for this chorus the suspended scaffolding of
a fictitious _natural state_ and placed thereon fictitious _natural
beings._ It is on this foundation that tragedy grew up, and so it
could of course dispense from the very first with a painful portrayal
of reality. Yet it is, not an arbitrary world placed by fancy betwixt
heaven and earth; rather is it a world possessing the same reality
and trustworthiness that Olympus with its dwellers possessed for the
believing Hellene. The satyr, as being the Dionysian chorist, lives
in a religiously acknowledged reality under the sanction of the myth
and cult. That tragedy begins with him, that the Dionysian wisdom of
tragedy speaks through him, is just as surprising a phenomenon to us
as, in general, the derivation of tragedy from the chorus. Perhaps
we shall get a starting-point for our inquiry, if I put forward the
proposition that the satyr, the fictitious natural being, is to the
man of culture what Dionysian music is to civilisation. Concerning
this latter, Richard Wagner says that it is neutralised by music even
as lamplight by daylight. In like manner, I believe, the Greek man of
culture felt himself neutralised in the presence of the satyric chorus:
and this is the most immediate effect of the Dionysian tragedy, that
the state and society, and, in general, the gaps between man and man
give way to an overwhelming feeling of oneness, which leads back to
the heart of nature. The metaphysical comfort,--with which, as I have
here intimated, every true tragedy dismisses us--that, in spite of
the perpetual change of phenomena, life at bottom is indestructibly
powerful and pleasurable, this comfort appears with corporeal lucidity
as the satyric chorus, as the chorus of natural beings, who live
ineradicable as it were behind all civilisation, and who, in spite of
the ceaseless change of generations and the history of nations, remain
for ever the same.

With this chorus the deep-minded Hellene, who is so singularly
qualified for the most delicate and severe suffering, consoles
himself:--he who has glanced with piercing eye into the very heart of
the terrible destructive processes of so-called universal history, as
also into the cruelty of nature, and is in danger of longing for a
Buddhistic negation of the will. Art saves him, and through art life
saves him--for herself.

For we must know that in the rapture of the Dionysian state, with its
annihilation of the ordinary bounds and limits of existence, there is
a _lethargic_ element, wherein all personal experiences of the past
are submerged. It is by this gulf of oblivion that the everyday world
and the world of Dionysian reality are separated from each other. But
as soon as this everyday reality rises again in consciousness, it is
felt as such, and nauseates us; an ascetic will-paralysing mood is
the fruit of these states. In this sense the Dionysian man may be
said to resemble Hamlet: both have for once seen into the true nature
of things,--they have _perceived,_ but they are loath to act; for
their action cannot change the eternal nature of things; they regard
it as shameful or ridiculous that one should require of them to set
aright the time which is out of joint. Knowledge kills action, action
requires the veil of illusion--it is this lesson which Hamlet teaches,
and not the cheap wisdom of John-a-Dreams who from too much reflection,
as it were from a surplus of possibilities, does not arrive at action
at all. Not reflection, no!--true knowledge, insight into appalling
truth, preponderates over all motives inciting to action, in Hamlet as
well as in the Dionysian man. No comfort avails any longer; his longing
goes beyond a world after death, beyond the gods themselves; existence
with its glittering reflection in the gods, or in an immortal other
world is abjured. In the consciousness of the truth he has perceived,
man now sees everywhere only the awfulness or the absurdity of
existence, he now understands the symbolism in the fate of Ophelia, he
now discerns the wisdom of the sylvan god Silenus: and loathing seizes
him.

Here, in this extremest danger of the will, _art_ approaches, as a
saving and healing enchantress; she alone is able to transform these
nauseating reflections on the awfulness or absurdity of existence
into representations wherewith it is possible to live: these are the
representations of the _sublime_ as the artistic subjugation of the
awful, and the _comic_ as the artistic delivery from the nausea of
the absurd. The satyric chorus of dithyramb is the saving deed of
Greek art; the paroxysms described above spent their force in the
intermediary world of these Dionysian followers.



8.


The satyr, like the idyllic shepherd of our more recent time, is the
offspring of a longing after the Primitive and the Natural; but mark
with what firmness and fearlessness the Greek embraced the man of
the woods, and again, how coyly and mawkishly the modern man dallied
with the flattering picture of a tender, flute-playing, soft-natured
shepherd! Nature, on which as yet no knowledge has been at work,
which maintains unbroken barriers to culture--this is what the Greek
saw in his satyr, which still was not on this account supposed to
coincide with the ape. On the contrary: it was the archetype of
man, the embodiment of his highest and strongest emotions, as the
enthusiastic reveller enraptured By the proximity of his god, as the
fellow-suffering companion in whom the suffering of the god repeats
itself, as the herald of wisdom speaking from the very depths of
nature, as the emblem of the sexual omnipotence of nature, which the
Greek was wont to contemplate with reverential awe. The satyr was
something sublime and godlike: he could not but appear so, especially
to the sad and wearied eye of the Dionysian man. He would have been
offended by our spurious tricked-up shepherd, while his eye dwelt
with sublime satisfaction on the naked and unstuntedly magnificent
characters of nature: here the illusion of culture was brushed away
from the archetype of man; here the true man, the bearded satyr,
revealed himself, who shouts joyfully to his god. Before him the
cultured man shrank to a lying caricature. Schiller is right also
with reference to these beginnings of tragic art: the chorus is a
living bulwark against the onsets of reality, because it--the satyric
chorus--portrays existence more truthfully, more realistically, more
perfectly than the cultured man who ordinarily considers himself as the
only reality. The sphere of poetry does not lie outside the world, like
some fantastic impossibility of a poet's imagination: it seeks to be
the very opposite, the unvarnished expression of truth, and must for
this very reason cast aside the false finery of that supposed reality
of the cultured man. The contrast between this intrinsic truth of
nature and the falsehood of culture, which poses as the only reality,
is similar to that existing between the eternal kernel of things, the
thing in itself, and the collective world of phenomena. And even as
tragedy, with its metaphysical comfort, points to the eternal life of
this kernel of existence, notwithstanding the perpetual dissolution of
phenomena, so the symbolism of the satyric chorus already expresses
figuratively this primordial relation between the thing in itself and
phenomenon. The idyllic shepherd of the modern man is but a copy of the
sum of the illusions of culture which he calls nature; the Dionysian
Greek desires truth and nature in their most potent form;--he sees
himself metamorphosed into the satyr.

The revelling crowd of the votaries of Dionysus rejoices, swayed by
such moods and perceptions, the power of which transforms them before
their own eyes, so that they imagine they behold themselves as
reconstituted genii of nature, as satyrs. The later constitution of the
tragic chorus is the artistic imitation of this natural phenomenon,
which of course required a separation of the Dionysian spectators from
the enchanted Dionysians. However, we must never lose sight of the fact
that the public of the Attic tragedy rediscovered itself in the chorus
of the orchestra, that there was in reality no antithesis of public
and chorus: for all was but one great sublime chorus of dancing and
singing satyrs, or of such as allowed themselves to be represented by
the satyrs. The Schlegelian observation must here reveal itself to us
in a deeper sense. The chorus is the "ideal spectator"[5] in so far as
it is the only _beholder,_[6] the beholder of the visionary world of
the scene. A public of spectators, as known to us, was unknown to the
Greeks. In their theatres the terraced structure of the spectators'
space rising in concentric arcs enabled every one, in the strictest
sense, to _overlook_ the entire world of culture around him, and in
surfeited contemplation to imagine himself a chorist. According to
this view, then, we may call the chorus in its primitive stage in
proto-tragedy, a self-mirroring of the Dionysian man: a phenomenon
which may be best exemplified by the process of the actor, who, if he
be truly gifted, sees hovering before his eyes with almost tangible
perceptibility the character he is to represent. The satyric chorus
is first of all a vision of the Dionysian throng, just as the world
of the stage is, in turn, a vision of the satyric chorus: the power
of this vision is great enough to render the eye dull and insensible
to the impression of "reality," to the presence of the cultured men
occupying the tiers of seats on every side. The form of the Greek
theatre reminds one of a lonesome mountain-valley: the architecture of
the scene appears like a luminous cloud-picture which the Bacchants
swarming on the mountains behold from the heights, as the splendid
encirclement in the midst of which the image of Dionysus is revealed to
them.

Owing to our learned conception of the elementary artistic processes,
this artistic proto-phenomenon, which is here introduced to explain
the tragic chorus, is almost shocking: while nothing can be more
certain than that the poet is a poet only in that he beholds himself
surrounded by forms which live and act before him, into the innermost
being of which his glance penetrates. By reason of a strange defeat in
our capacities, we modern men are apt to represent to ourselves the
æsthetic proto-phenomenon as too complex and abstract. For the true
poet the metaphor is not a rhetorical figure, but a vicarious image
which actually hovers before him in place of a concept. The character
is not for him an aggregate composed of a studied collection of
particular traits, but an irrepressibly live person appearing before
his eyes, and differing only from the corresponding vision of the
painter by its ever continued life and action. Why is it that Homer
sketches much more vividly[7] than all the other poets? Because he
contemplates[8] much more. We talk so abstractly about poetry, because
we are all wont to be bad poets. At bottom the æsthetic phenomenon is
simple: let a man but have the faculty of perpetually seeing a lively
play and of constantly living surrounded by hosts of spirits, then he
is a poet: let him but feel the impulse to transform himself and to
talk from out the bodies and souls of others, then he is a dramatist.

The Dionysian excitement is able to impart to a whole mass of men
this artistic faculty of seeing themselves surrounded by such a host
of spirits, with whom they know themselves to be inwardly one. This
function of the tragic chorus is the _dramatic_ proto-phenomenon: to
see one's self transformed before one's self, and then to act as if
one had really entered into another body, into another character. This
function stands at the beginning of the development of the drama.
Here we have something different from the rhapsodist, who does not
blend with his pictures, but only sees them, like the painter, with
contemplative eye outside of him; here we actually have a surrender
of the individual by his entering into another nature. Moreover this
phenomenon appears in the form of an epidemic: a whole throng feels
itself metamorphosed in this wise. Hence it is that the dithyramb is
essentially different from every other variety of the choric song. The
virgins, who with laurel twigs in their hands solemnly proceed to
the temple of Apollo and sing a processional hymn, remain what they
are and retain their civic names: the dithyrambic chorus is a chorus
of transformed beings, whose civic past and social rank are totally
forgotten: they have become the timeless servants of their god that
live aloof from all the spheres of society. Every other variety of
the choric lyric of the Hellenes is but an enormous enhancement of
the Apollonian unit-singer: while in the dithyramb we have before us
a community of unconscious actors, who mutually regard themselves as
transformed among one another.

This enchantment is the prerequisite of all dramatic art. In this
enchantment the Dionysian reveller sees himself as a satyr, _and as
satyr he in turn beholds the god,_ that is, in his transformation he
sees a new vision outside him as the Apollonian consummation of his
state. With this new vision the drama is complete.

According to this view, we must understand Greek tragedy as the
Dionysian chorus, which always disburdens itself anew in an Apollonian
world of pictures. The choric parts, therefore, with which tragedy is
interlaced, are in a manner the mother-womb of the entire so-called
dialogue, that is, of the whole stage-world, of the drama proper. In
several successive outbursts does this primordial basis of tragedy beam
forth the vision of the drama, which is a dream-phenomenon throughout,
and, as such, epic in character: on the other hand, however, as
objectivation of a Dionysian state, it does not represent the
Apollonian redemption in appearance, but, conversely, the dissolution
of the individual and his unification with primordial existence.
Accordingly, the drama is the Apollonian embodiment of Dionysian
perceptions and influences, and is thereby separated from the epic as
by an immense gap.

The _chorus_ of Greek tragedy, the symbol of the mass of the people
moved by Dionysian excitement, is thus fully explained by our
conception of it as here set forth. Whereas, being accustomed to the
position of a chorus on the modern stage, especially an operatic
chorus, we could never comprehend why the tragic chorus of the Greeks
should be older, more primitive, indeed, more important than the
"action" proper,--as has been so plainly declared by the voice of
tradition; whereas, furthermore, we could not reconcile with this
traditional paramount importance and primitiveness the fact of the
chorus' being composed only of humble, ministering beings; indeed, at
first only of goatlike satyrs; whereas, finally, the orchestra before
the scene was always a riddle to us; we have learned to comprehend at
length that the scene, together with the action, was fundamentally
and originally conceived only as a _vision,_ that the only reality
is just the chorus, which of itself generates the vision and speaks
thereof with the entire symbolism of dancing, tone, and word. This
chorus beholds in the vision its lord and master Dionysus, and is thus
for ever the _serving_ chorus: it sees how he, the god, suffers and
glorifies himself, and therefore does not itself _act_. But though its
attitude towards the god is throughout the attitude of ministration,
this is nevertheless the highest expression, the Dionysian expression
of _Nature,_ and therefore, like Nature herself, the chorus utters
oracles and wise sayings when transported with enthusiasm: as
_fellow-sufferer_ it is also the _sage_ proclaiming truth from out the
heart of Nature. Thus, then, originates the fantastic figure, which
seems so shocking, of the wise and enthusiastic satyr, who is at the
same time "the dumb man" in contrast to the god: the image of Nature
and her strongest impulses, yea, the symbol of Nature, and at the same
time the herald of her art and wisdom: musician, poet, dancer, and
visionary in one person.

Agreeably to this view, and agreeably to tradition, _Dionysus,_ the
proper stage-hero and focus of vision, is not at first actually present
in the oldest period of tragedy, but is only imagined as present:
_i.e.,_ tragedy is originally only "chorus" and not "drama." Later
on the attempt is made to exhibit the god as real and to display the
visionary figure together with its glorifying encirclement before the
eyes of all; it is here that the "drama" in the narrow sense of the
term begins. To the dithyrambic chorus is now assigned the task of
exciting the minds of the hearers to such a pitch of Dionysian frenzy,
that, when the tragic hero appears on the stage, they do not behold
in him, say, the unshapely masked man, but a visionary figure, born
as it were of their own ecstasy. Let us picture Admetes thinking in
profound meditation of his lately departed wife Alcestis, and quite
consuming himself in spiritual contemplation thereof--when suddenly
the veiled figure of a woman resembling her in form and gait is led
towards him: let us picture his sudden trembling anxiety, his agitated
comparisons, his instinctive conviction--and we shall have an analogon
to the sensation with which the spectator, excited to Dionysian frenzy,
saw the god approaching on the stage, a god with whose sufferings he
had already become identified. He involuntarily transferred the entire
picture of the god, fluttering magically before his soul, to this
masked figure and resolved its reality as it were into a phantasmal
unreality. This is the Apollonian dream-state, in which the world
of day is veiled, and a new world, clearer, more intelligible, more
striking than the former, and nevertheless more shadowy, is ever born
anew in perpetual change before our eyes. We accordingly recognise in
tragedy a thorough-going stylistic contrast: the language, colour,
flexibility and dynamics of the dialogue fall apart in the Dionysian
lyrics of the chorus on the one hand, and in the Apollonian dream-world
of the scene on the other, into entirely separate spheres of
expression. The Apollonian appearances, in which Dionysus objectifies
himself, are no longer "ein ewiges Meer, ein wechselnd Weben, ein
glühend Leben,"[9] as is the music of the chorus, they are no longer
the forces merely felt, but not condensed into a picture, by which
the inspired votary of Dionysus divines the proximity of his god: the
clearness and firmness of epic form now speak to him from the scene,
Dionysus now no longer speaks through forces, but as an epic hero,
almost in the language of Homer.


[5] Zuschauer.

[6] Schauer.

[7] Anschaulicher.

[8] Anschaut.

[9] An eternal sea, A weaving, flowing, Life, all glowing.
_Faust,_ trans. of Bayard Taylor.--TR.



9.


Whatever rises to the surface in the dialogue of the Apollonian part
of Greek tragedy, appears simple, transparent, beautiful. In this
sense the dialogue is a copy of the Hellene, whose nature reveals
itself in the dance, because in the dance the greatest energy is merely
potential, but betrays itself nevertheless in flexible and vivacious
movements. The language of the Sophoclean heroes, for instance,
surprises us by its Apollonian precision and clearness, so that we at
once imagine we see into the innermost recesses of their being, and
marvel not a little that the way to these recesses is so short. But
if for the moment we disregard the character of the hero which rises
to the surface and grows visible--and which at bottom is nothing but
the light-picture cast on a dark wall, that is, appearance through and
through,--if rather we enter into the myth which projects itself in
these bright mirrorings, we shall of a sudden experience a phenomenon
which bears a reverse relation to one familiar in optics. When, after
a vigorous effort to gaze into the sun, we turn away blinded, we have
dark-coloured spots before our eyes as restoratives, so to speak;
while, on the contrary, those light-picture phenomena of the Sophoclean
hero,--in short, the Apollonian of the mask,--are the necessary
productions of a glance into the secret and terrible things of nature,
as it were shining spots to heal the eye which dire night has seared.
Only in this sense can we hope to be able to grasp the true meaning of
the serious and significant notion of "Greek cheerfulness"; while of
course we encounter the misunderstood notion of this cheerfulness, as
resulting from a state of unendangered comfort, on all the ways and
paths of the present time.

The most sorrowful figure of the Greek stage, the hapless _Œdipus,_
was understood by Sophocles as the noble man, who in spite of his
wisdom was destined to error and misery, but nevertheless through
his extraordinary sufferings ultimately exerted a magical, wholesome
influence on all around him, which continues effective even after
his death. The noble man does not sin; this is what the thoughtful
poet wishes to tell us: all laws, all natural order, yea, the moral
world itself, may be destroyed through his action, but through this
very action a higher magic circle of influences is brought into play,
which establish a new world on the ruins of the old that has been
overthrown. This is what the poet, in so far as he is at the same time
a religious thinker, wishes to tell us: as poet, he shows us first of
all a wonderfully complicated legal mystery, which the judge slowly
unravels, link by link, to his own destruction. The truly Hellenic
delight at this dialectical loosening is so great, that a touch of
surpassing cheerfulness is thereby communicated to the entire play,
which everywhere blunts the edge of the horrible presuppositions of the
procedure. In the "Œdipus at Colonus" we find the same cheerfulness,
elevated, however, to an infinite transfiguration: in contrast to
the aged king, subjected to an excess of misery, and exposed solely
as a _sufferer_ to all that befalls him, we have here a supermundane
cheerfulness, which descends from a divine sphere and intimates to
us that in his purely passive attitude the hero attains his highest
activity, the influence of which extends far beyond his life, while
his earlier conscious musing and striving led him only to passivity.
Thus, then, the legal knot of the fable of Œdipus, which to mortal
eyes appears indissolubly entangled, is slowly unravelled--and the
profoundest human joy comes upon us in the presence of this divine
counterpart of dialectics. If this explanation does justice to the
poet, it may still be asked whether the substance of the myth is
thereby exhausted; and here it turns out that the entire conception
of the poet is nothing but the light-picture which healing nature
holds up to us after a glance into the abyss. Œdipus, the murderer of
his father, the husband of his mother, Œdipus, the interpreter of the
riddle of the Sphinx! What does the mysterious triad of these deeds
of destiny tell us? There is a primitive popular belief, especially
in Persia, that a wise Magian can be born only of incest: which
we have forthwith to interpret to ourselves with reference to the
riddle-solving and mother-marrying Œdipus, to the effect that when
the boundary of the present and future, the rigid law of individuation
and, in general, the intrinsic spell of nature, are broken by prophetic
and magical powers, an extraordinary counter-naturalness--as, in this
case, incest--must have preceded as a cause; for how else could one
force nature to surrender her secrets but by victoriously opposing her,
_i.e.,_ by means of the Unnatural? It is this intuition which I see
imprinted in the awful triad of the destiny of Œdipus: the very man
who solves the riddle of nature--that double-constituted Sphinx--must
also, as the murderer of his father and husband of his mother, break
the holiest laws of nature. Indeed, it seems as if the myth sought to
whisper into our ears that wisdom, especially Dionysian wisdom, is
an unnatural abomination, and that whoever, through his knowledge,
plunges nature into an abyss of annihilation, must also experience
the dissolution of nature in himself. "The sharpness of wisdom turns
round upon the sage: wisdom is a crime against nature": such terrible
expressions does the myth call out to us: but the Hellenic poet touches
like a sunbeam the sublime and formidable Memnonian statue of the myth,
so that it suddenly begins to sound--in Sophoclean melodies.

With the glory of passivity I now contrast the glory of activity which
illuminates the _Prometheus_ of Æschylus. That which Æschylus the
thinker had to tell us here, but which as a poet he only allows us to
surmise by his symbolic picture, the youthful Goethe succeeded in
disclosing to us in the daring words of his Prometheus:--

    "Hier sitz' ich, forme Menschen
    Nach meinem Bilde,
    Ein Geschlecht, das mir gleich sei,
    Zu leiden, zu weinen,
    Zu geniessen und zu freuen sich,
    Und dein nicht zu achten,
    Wie ich!"[10]

Man, elevating himself to the rank of the Titans, acquires his culture
by his own efforts, and compels the gods to unite with him, because
in his self-sufficient wisdom he has their existence and their limits
in his hand. What is most wonderful, however, in this Promethean
form, which according to its fundamental conception is the specific
hymn of impiety, is the profound Æschylean yearning for _justice_:
the untold sorrow of the bold "single-handed being" on the one hand,
and the divine need, ay, the foreboding of a twilight of the gods, on
the other, the power of these two worlds of suffering constraining
to reconciliation, to metaphysical oneness--all this suggests most
forcibly the central and main position of the Æschylean view of
things, which sees Moira as eternal justice enthroned above gods and
men. In view of the astonishing boldness with which Æschylus places the
Olympian world on his scales of justice, it must be remembered that
the deep-minded Greek had an immovably firm substratum of metaphysical
thought in his mysteries, and that all his sceptical paroxysms could
be discharged upon the Olympians. With reference to these deities,
the Greek artist, in particular, had an obscure feeling as to mutual
dependency: and it is just in the Prometheus of Æschylus that this
feeling is symbolised. The Titanic artist found in himself the
daring belief that he could create men and at least destroy Olympian
deities: namely, by his superior wisdom, for which, to be sure, he had
to atone by eternal suffering. The splendid "can-ing" of the great
genius, bought too cheaply even at the price of eternal suffering,
the stern pride of the _artist_: this is the essence and soul of
Æschylean poetry, while Sophocles in his Œdipus preludingly strikes up
the victory-song of the _saint_. But even this interpretation which
Æschylus has given to the myth does not fathom its astounding depth of
terror; the fact is rather that the artist's delight in unfolding, the
cheerfulness of artistic creating bidding defiance to all calamity,
is but a shining stellar and nebular image reflected in a black sea
of sadness. The tale of Prometheus is an original possession of the
entire Aryan family of races, and documentary evidence of their
capacity for the profoundly tragic; indeed, it is not improbable that
this myth has the same characteristic significance for the Aryan
race that the myth of the fall of man has for the Semitic, and that
there is a relationship between the two myths like that of brother and
sister. The presupposition of the Promethean myth is the transcendent
value which a naïve humanity attach to _fire_ as the true palladium
of every ascending culture: that man, however, should dispose at will
of this fire, and should not receive it only as a gift from heaven,
as the igniting lightning or the warming solar flame, appeared to the
contemplative primordial men as crime and robbery of the divine nature.
And thus the first philosophical problem at once causes a painful,
irreconcilable antagonism between man and God, and puts as it were
a mass of rock at the gate of every culture. The best and highest
that men can acquire they obtain by a crime, and must now in their
turn take upon themselves its consequences, namely the whole flood of
sufferings and sorrows with which the offended celestials _must_ visit
the nobly aspiring race of man: a bitter reflection, which, by the
_dignity_ it confers on crime, contrasts strangely with the Semitic
myth of the fall of man, in which curiosity, beguilement, seducibility,
wantonness,--in short, a whole series of pre-eminently feminine
passions,--were regarded as the origin of evil. What distinguishes
the Aryan representation is the sublime view of _active sin_ as the
properly Promethean virtue, which suggests at the same time the ethical
basis of pessimistic tragedy as the _justification_ of human evil--of
human guilt as well as of the suffering incurred thereby. The misery in
the essence of things--which the contemplative Aryan is not disposed
to explain away--the antagonism in the heart of the world, manifests
itself to him as a medley of different worlds, for instance, a Divine
and a human world, each of which is in the right individually, but
as a separate existence alongside of another has to suffer for its
individuation. With the heroic effort made by the individual for
universality, in his attempt to pass beyond the bounds of individuation
and become the _one_ universal being, he experiences in himself the
primordial contradiction concealed in the essence of things, _i.e.,_
he trespasses and suffers. Accordingly crime[11] is understood by
the Aryans to be a man, sin[12] by the Semites a woman; as also, the
original crime is committed by man, the original sin by woman. Besides,
the witches' chorus says:

    "Wir nehmen das nicht so genau:
    Mit tausend Schritten macht's die Frau;
    Doch wie sie auch sich eilen kann
    Mit einem Sprunge macht's der Mann."[13]

He who understands this innermost core of the tale of
Prometheus--namely the necessity of crime imposed on the titanically
striving individual--will at once be conscious of the un-Apollonian
nature of this pessimistic representation: for Apollo seeks to pacify
individual beings precisely by drawing boundary lines between them,
and by again and again calling attention thereto, with his requirements
of self-knowledge and due proportion, as the holiest laws of the
universe. In order, however, to prevent the form from congealing to
Egyptian rigidity and coldness in consequence of this Apollonian
tendency, in order to prevent the extinction of the motion of the
entire lake in the effort to prescribe to the individual wave its path
and compass, the high tide of the Dionysian tendency destroyed from
time to time all the little circles in which the one-sided Apollonian
"will" sought to confine the Hellenic world. The suddenly swelling
tide of the Dionysian then takes the separate little wave-mountains of
individuals on its back, just as the brother of Prometheus, the Titan
Atlas, does with the earth. This Titanic impulse, to become as it were
the Atlas of all individuals, and to carry them on broad shoulders
higher and higher, farther and farther, is what the Promethean and the
Dionysian have in common. In this respect the Æschylean Prometheus is
a Dionysian mask, while, in the afore-mentioned profound yearning for
justice, Æschylus betrays to the intelligent observer his paternal
descent from Apollo, the god of individuation and of the boundaries
of justice. And so the double-being of the Æschylean Prometheus, his
conjoint Dionysian and Apollonian nature, might be thus expressed in
an abstract formula: "Whatever exists is alike just and unjust, and
equally justified in both."

    Das ist deine Welt! Das heisst eine Welt![14]


[10]

    "Here sit I, forming mankind
    In my image,
    A race resembling me,--
    To sorrow and to weep,
    To taste, to hold, to enjoy,
    And not have need of thee,
    As I!"

(Translation in Hæckel's _History of the Evolution of Man._)

[11] _Der_ Frevel.]

[12] _Die_ Sünde.

[13]

    We do not measure with such care:
    Woman in thousand steps is there,
    But howsoe'er she hasten may.
    Man in one leap has cleared the way.
    _Faust,_ trans. of Bayard Taylor.--TR.


[14] This is thy world, and what a world!--_Faust._



10.


It is an indisputable tradition that Greek tragedy in its earliest
form had for its theme only the sufferings of Dionysus, and that for
some time the only stage-hero therein was simply Dionysus himself.
With the same confidence, however, we can maintain that not until
Euripides did Dionysus cease to be the tragic hero, and that in fact
all the celebrated figures of the Greek stage--Prometheus, Œdipus,
etc.--are but masks of this original hero, Dionysus. The presence of a
god behind all these masks is the one essential cause of the typical
"ideality," so oft exciting wonder, of these celebrated figures. Some
one, I know not whom, has maintained that all individuals are comic as
individuals and are consequently un-tragic: from whence it might be
inferred that the Greeks in general _could_ not endure individuals on
the tragic stage. And they really seem to have had these sentiments:
as, in general, it is to be observed that the Platonic discrimination
and valuation of the "idea" in contrast to the "eidolon," the image,
is deeply rooted in the Hellenic being. Availing ourselves of Plato's
terminology, however, we should have to speak of the tragic figures of
the Hellenic stage somewhat as follows. The one truly real Dionysus
appears in a multiplicity of forms, in the mask of a fighting hero
and entangled, as it were, in the net of an individual will. As the
visibly appearing god now talks and acts, he resembles an erring,
striving, suffering individual: and that, in general, he _appears_
with such epic precision and clearness, is due to the dream-reading
Apollo, who reads to the chorus its Dionysian state through this
symbolic appearance. In reality, however, this hero is the suffering
Dionysus of the mysteries, a god experiencing in himself the sufferings
of individuation, of whom wonderful myths tell that as a boy he was
dismembered by the Titans and has been worshipped in this state
as Zagreus:[15] whereby is intimated that this dismemberment, the
properly Dionysian _suffering,_ is like a transformation into air,
water, earth, and fire, that we must therefore regard the state of
individuation as the source and primal cause of all suffering, as
something objectionable in itself. From the smile of this Dionysus
sprang the Olympian gods, from his tears sprang man. In his existence
as a dismembered god, Dionysus has the dual nature of a cruel
barbarised demon, and a mild pacific ruler. But the hope of the epopts
looked for a new birth of Dionysus, which we have now to conceive of in
anticipation as the end of individuation: it was for this coming third
Dionysus that the stormy jubilation-hymns of the epopts resounded. And
it is only this hope that sheds a ray of joy upon the features of a
world torn asunder and shattered into individuals: as is symbolised in
the myth by Demeter sunk in eternal sadness, who _rejoices_ again only
when told that she may _once more_ give birth to Dionysus In the views
of things here given we already have all the elements of a profound and
pessimistic contemplation of the world, and along with these we have
the _mystery doctrine of tragedy_: the fundamental knowledge of the
oneness of all existing things, the consideration of individuation as
the primal cause of evil, and art as the joyous hope that the spell of
individuation may be broken, as the augury of a restored oneness.

It has already been intimated that the Homeric epos is the poem
of Olympian culture, wherewith this culture has sung its own song
of triumph over the terrors of the war of the Titans. Under the
predominating influence of tragic poetry, these Homeric myths are now
reproduced anew, and show by this metempsychosis that meantime the
Olympian culture also has been vanquished by a still deeper view of
things. The haughty Titan Prometheus has announced to his Olympian
tormentor that the extremest danger will one day menace his rule,
unless he ally with him betimes. In Æschylus we perceive the terrified
Zeus, apprehensive of his end, in alliance with the Titan. Thus, the
former age of the Titans is subsequently brought from Tartarus once
more to the light of day. The philosophy of wild and naked nature
beholds with the undissembled mien of truth the myths of the Homeric
world as they dance past: they turn pale, they tremble before the
lightning glance of this goddess--till the powerful fist[16] of
the Dionysian artist forces them into the service of the new deity.
Dionysian truth takes over the entire domain of myth as symbolism of
_its_ knowledge, which it makes known partly in the public cult of
tragedy and partly in the secret celebration of the dramatic mysteries,
always, however, in the old mythical garb. What was the power, which
freed Prometheus from his vultures and transformed the myth into a
vehicle of Dionysian wisdom? It is the Heracleian power of music:
which, having reached its highest manifestness in tragedy, can invest
myths with a new and most profound significance, which we have already
had occasion to characterise as the most powerful faculty of music. For
it is the fate of every myth to insinuate itself into the narrow limits
of some alleged historical reality, and to be treated by some later
generation as a solitary fact with historical claims: and the Greeks
were already fairly on the way to restamp the whole of their mythical
juvenile dream sagaciously and arbitrarily into a historico-pragmatical
_juvenile history._ For this is the manner in which religions are
wont to die out: when of course under the stern, intelligent eyes of
an orthodox dogmatism, the mythical presuppositions of a religion are
systematised as a completed sum of historical events, and when one
begins apprehensively to defend the credibility of the myth, while at
the same time opposing all continuation of their natural vitality and
luxuriance; when, accordingly, the feeling for myth dies out, and its
place is taken by the claim of religion to historical foundations.
This dying myth was now seized by the new-born genius of Dionysian
music, in whose hands it bloomed once more, with such colours as it
had never yet displayed, with a fragrance that awakened a longing
anticipation of a metaphysical world. After this final effulgence
it collapses, its leaves wither, and soon the scoffing Lucians of
antiquity catch at the discoloured and faded flowers which the winds
carry off in every direction. Through tragedy the myth attains its
profoundest significance, its most expressive form; it rises once more
like a wounded hero, and the whole surplus of vitality, together with
the philosophical calmness of the Dying, burns in its eyes with a last
powerful gleam.

What meantest thou, oh impious Euripides, in seeking once more to
enthral this dying one? It died under thy ruthless hands: and then
thou madest use of counterfeit, masked myth, which like the ape of
Heracles could only trick itself out in the old finery. And as myth
died in thy hands, so also died the genius of music; though thou
couldst covetously plunder all the gardens of music--thou didst only
realise a counterfeit, masked music. And because thou hast forsaken
Dionysus. Apollo hath also forsaken thee; rout up all the passions from
their haunts and conjure them into thy sphere, sharpen and polish a
sophistical dialectics for the speeches of thy heroes--thy very heroes
have only counterfeit, masked passions, and speak only counterfeit,
masked music.


[15] See article by Mr. Arthur Symons in _The Academy,_ 30th
August 1902.

[16] Die mächtige Faust.--Cf. _Faust,_ Chorus of
Spirits.--TR.



11.


Greek tragedy had a fate different from that of all her older sister
arts: she died by suicide, in consequence of an irreconcilable
conflict; accordingly she died tragically, while they all passed away
very calmly and beautifully in ripe old age. For if it be in accordance
with a happy state of things to depart this life without a struggle,
leaving behind a fair posterity, the closing period of these older
arts exhibits such a happy state of things: slowly they sink out of
sight, and before their dying eyes already stand their fairer progeny,
who impatiently lift up their heads with courageous mien. The death of
Greek tragedy, on the other hand, left an immense void, deeply felt
everywhere. Even as certain Greek sailors in the time of Tiberius once
heard upon a lonesome island the thrilling cry, "great Pan is dead": so
now as it were sorrowful wailing sounded through the Hellenic world:
"Tragedy is dead! Poetry itself has perished with her! Begone, begone,
ye stunted, emaciated epigones! Begone to Hades, that ye may for once
eat your fill of the crumbs of your former masters!"

But when after all a new Art blossomed forth which revered tragedy as
her ancestress and mistress, it was observed with horror that she did
indeed bear the features of her mother, but those very features the
latter had exhibited in her long death-struggle. It was _Euripides_ who
fought this death-struggle of tragedy; the later art is known as the
_New Attic Comedy._ In it the degenerate form of tragedy lived on as a
monument of the most painful and violent death of tragedy proper.

This connection between the two serves to explain the passionate
attachment to Euripides evinced by the poets of the New Comedy, and
hence we are no longer surprised at the wish of Philemon, who would
have got himself hanged at once, with the sole design of being able
to visit Euripides in the lower regions: if only he could be assured
generally that the deceased still had his wits. But if we desire, as
briefly as possible, and without professing to say aught exhaustive on
the subject, to characterise what Euripides has in common with Menander
and Philemon, and what appealed to them so strongly as worthy of
imitation: it will suffice to say that the _spectator_ was brought upon
the stage by Euripides. He who has perceived the material of which the
Promethean tragic writers prior to Euripides formed their heroes, and
how remote from their purpose it was to bring the true mask of reality
on the stage, will also know what to make of the wholly divergent
tendency of Euripides. Through him the commonplace individual forced
his way from the spectators' benches to the stage itself; the mirror in
which formerly only great and bold traits found expression now showed
the painful exactness that conscientiously reproduces even the abortive
lines of nature. Odysseus, the typical Hellene of the Old Art, sank,
in the hands of the new poets, to the figure of the Græculus, who, as
the good-naturedly cunning domestic slave, stands henceforth in the
centre of dramatic interest. What Euripides takes credit for in the
Aristophanean "Frogs," namely, that by his household remedies he freed
tragic art from its pompous corpulency, is apparent above all in his
tragic heroes. The spectator now virtually saw and heard his double on
the Euripidean stage, and rejoiced that he could talk so well. But this
joy was not all: one even learned of Euripides how to speak: he prides
himself upon this in his contest with Æschylus: how the people have
learned from him how to observe, debate, and draw conclusions according
to the rules of art and with the cleverest sophistications. In general
it may be said that through this revolution of the popular language he
made the New Comedy possible. For it was henceforth no longer a secret,
how--and with what saws--the commonplace could represent and express
itself on the stage. Civic mediocrity, on which Euripides built all
his political hopes, was now suffered to speak, while heretofore the
demigod in tragedy and the drunken satyr, or demiman, in comedy, had
determined the character of the language. And so the Aristophanean
Euripides prides himself on having portrayed the common, familiar,
everyday life and dealings of the people, concerning which all are
qualified to pass judgment. If now the entire populace philosophises,
manages land and goods with unheard-of circumspection, and conducts
law-suits, he takes all the credit to himself, and glories in the
splendid results of the wisdom with which he inoculated the rabble.

It was to a populace prepared and enlightened in this manner that the
New Comedy could now address itself, of which Euripides had become
as it were the chorus-master; only that in this case the chorus of
spectators had to be trained. As soon as this chorus was trained to
sing in the Euripidean key, there arose that chesslike variety of the
drama, the New Comedy, with its perpetual triumphs of cunning and
artfulness. But Euripides--the chorus-master--was praised incessantly:
indeed, people would have killed themselves in order to learn yet more
from him, had they not known that tragic poets were quite as dead as
tragedy. But with it the Hellene had surrendered the belief in his
immortality; not only the belief in an ideal past, but also the belief
in an ideal future. The saying taken from the well-known epitaph, "as
an old man, frivolous and capricious," applies also to aged Hellenism.
The passing moment, wit, levity, and caprice, are its highest deities;
the fifth class, that of the slaves, now attains to power, at least in
sentiment: and if we can still speak at all of "Greek cheerfulness,"
it is the cheerfulness of the slave who has nothing of consequence to
answer for, nothing great to strive for, and cannot value anything of
the past or future higher than the present. It was this semblance of
"Greek cheerfulness" which so revolted the deep-minded and formidable
natures of the first four centuries of Christianity: this womanish
flight from earnestness and terror, this cowardly contentedness with
easy pleasure, was not only contemptible to them, but seemed to be a
specifically anti-Christian sentiment. And we must ascribe it to its
influence that the conception of Greek antiquity, which lived on for
centuries, preserved with almost enduring persistency that peculiar
hectic colour of cheerfulness--as if there had never been a Sixth
Century with its birth of tragedy, its Mysteries, its Pythagoras and
Heraclitus, indeed as if the art-works of that great period did not at
all exist, which in fact--each by itself--can in no wise be explained
as having sprung from the soil of such a decrepit and slavish love
of existence and cheerfulness, and point to an altogether different
conception of things as their source.

The assertion made a moment ago, that Euripides introduced the
spectator on the stage to qualify him the better to pass judgment on
the drama, will make it appear as if the old tragic art was always
in a false relation to the spectator: and one would be tempted to
extol the radical tendency of Euripides to bring about an adequate
relation between art-work and public as an advance on Sophocles. But,
as things are, "public" is merely a word, and not at all a homogeneous
and constant quantity. Why should the artist be under obligations to
accommodate himself to a power whose strength is merely in numbers?
And if by virtue of his endowments and aspirations he feels himself
superior to every one of these spectators, how could he feel greater
respect for the collective expression of all these subordinate
capacities than for the relatively highest-endowed individual
spectator? In truth, if ever a Greek artist treated his public
throughout a long life with presumptuousness and self-sufficiency,
it was Euripides, who, even when the masses threw themselves at his
feet, with sublime defiance made an open assault on his own tendency,
the very tendency with which he had triumphed over the masses. If this
genius had had the slightest reverence for the pandemonium of the
public, he would have broken down long before the middle of his career
beneath the weighty blows of his own failures. These considerations
here make it obvious that our formula--namely, that Euripides brought
the spectator upon the stage, in order to make him truly competent to
pass judgment--was but a provisional one, and that we must seek for a
deeper understanding of his tendency. Conversely, it is undoubtedly
well known that Æschylus and Sophocles, during all their lives, indeed,
far beyond their lives, enjoyed the full favour of the people, and that
therefore in the case of these predecessors of Euripides the idea of
a false relation between art-work and public was altogether excluded.
What was it that thus forcibly diverted this highly gifted artist, so
incessantly impelled to production, from the path over which shone the
sun of the greatest names in poetry and the cloudless heaven of popular
favour? What strange consideration for the spectator led him to defy,
the spectator? How could he, owing to too much respect for the public
--dis-respect the public?

Euripides--and this is the solution of the riddle just propounded--felt
himself, as a poet, undoubtedly superior to the masses, but not to
two of his spectators: he brought the masses upon the stage; these
two spectators he revered as the only competent judges and masters
of his art: in compliance with their directions and admonitions, he
transferred the entire world of sentiments, passions, and experiences,
hitherto present at every festival representation as the invisible
chorus on the spectators' benches, into the souls of his stage-heroes;
he yielded to their demands when he also sought for these new
characters the new word and the new tone; in their voices alone he
heard the conclusive verdict on his work, as also the cheering promise
of triumph when he found himself condemned as usual by the justice of
the public.

Of these two, spectators the one is--Euripides himself, Euripides _as
thinker,_ not as poet. It might be said of him, that his unusually
large fund of critical ability, as in the case of Lessing, if it did
not create, at least constantly fructified a productively artistic
collateral impulse. With this faculty, with all the clearness and
dexterity of his critical thought, Euripides had sat in the theatre and
striven to recognise in the masterpieces of his great predecessors, as
in faded paintings, feature and feature, line and line. And here had
happened to him what one initiated in the deeper arcana of Æschylean
tragedy must needs have expected: he observed something incommensurable
in every feature and in every line, a certain deceptive distinctness
and at the same time an enigmatic profundity, yea an infinitude, of
background. Even the clearest figure had always a comet's tail attached
to it, which seemed to suggest the uncertain and the inexplicable.
The same twilight shrouded the structure of the drama, especially the
significance of the chorus. And how doubtful seemed the solution of
the ethical problems to his mind! How questionable the treatment of
the myths! How unequal the distribution of happiness and misfortune!
Even in the language of the Old Tragedy there was much that was
objectionable to him, or at least enigmatical; he found especially
too much pomp for simple affairs, too many tropes and immense things
for the plainness of the characters. Thus he sat restlessly pondering
in the theatre, and as a spectator he acknowledged to himself that he
did not understand his great predecessors. If, however, he thought the
understanding the root proper of all enjoyment and productivity, he had
to inquire and look about to see whether any one else thought as he
did, and also acknowledged this incommensurability. But most people,
and among them the best individuals, had only a distrustful smile for
him, while none could explain why the great masters were still in the
right in face of his scruples and objections. And in this painful
condition he found _that other spectator,_ who did not comprehend,
and therefore did not esteem, tragedy. In alliance with him he could
venture, from amid his lonesomeness, to begin the prodigious struggle
against the art of Æschylus and Sophocles--not with polemic writings,
but as a dramatic poet, who opposed _his own_ conception of tragedy to
the traditional one.



12.


Before we name this other spectator, let us pause here a moment in
order to recall our own impression, as previously described, of the
discordant and incommensurable elements in the nature of Æschylean
tragedy. Let us think of our own astonishment at the _chorus_ and
the _tragic hero_ of that type of tragedy, neither of which we could
reconcile with our practices any more than with tradition--till we
rediscovered this duplexity itself as the origin and essence of Greek
tragedy, as the expression of two interwoven artistic impulses, _the
Apollonian and the Dionysian_.

To separate this primitive and all-powerful Dionysian element from
tragedy, and to build up a new and purified form of tragedy on the
basis of a non-Dionysian art, morality, and conception of things--such
is the tendency of Euripides which now reveals itself to us in a clear
light.

In a myth composed in the eve of his life, Euripides himself most
urgently propounded to his contemporaries the question as to the
value and signification of this tendency. Is the Dionysian entitled
to exist at all? Should it not be forcibly rooted out of the Hellenic
soil? Certainly, the poet tells us, if only it were possible: but the
god Dionysus is too powerful; his most intelligent adversary--like
Pentheus in the "Bacchæ"--is unwittingly enchanted by him, and
in this enchantment meets his fate. The judgment of the two old
sages, Cadmus and Tiresias, seems to be also the judgment of the
aged poet: that the reflection of the wisest individuals does not
overthrow old popular traditions, nor the perpetually propagating
worship of Dionysus, that in fact it behoves us to display at least a
diplomatically cautious concern in the presence of such strange forces:
where however it is always possible that the god may take offence
at such lukewarm participation, and finally change the diplomat--in
this case Cadmus--into a dragon. This is what a poet tells us, who
opposed Dionysus with heroic valour throughout a long life--in order
finally to wind up his career with a glorification of his adversary,
and with suicide, like one staggering from giddiness, who, in order
to escape the horrible vertigo he can no longer endure, casts himself
from a tower. This tragedy--the Bacchæ--is a protest against the
practicability of his own tendency; alas, and it has already been
put into practice! The surprising thing had happened: when the poet
recanted, his tendency had already conquered. Dionysus had already
been scared from the tragic stage, and in fact by a demonic power
which spoke through Euripides. Even Euripides was, in a certain sense,
only a mask: the deity that spoke through him was neither Dionysus nor
Apollo, but an altogether new-born demon, called _Socrates._ This is
the new antithesis: the Dionysian and the Socratic, and the art-work of
Greek tragedy was wrecked on it. What if even Euripides now seeks to
comfort us by his recantation? It is of no avail: the most magnificent
temple lies in ruins. What avails the lamentation of the destroyer,
and his confession that it was the most beautiful of all temples? And
even that Euripides has been changed into a dragon as a punishment by
the art-critics of all ages--who could be content with this wretched
compensation?

Let us now approach this _Socratic_ tendency with which Euripides
combated and vanquished Æschylean tragedy.

We must now ask ourselves, what could be the ulterior aim of the
Euripidean design, which, in the highest ideality of its execution,
would found drama exclusively on the non-Dionysian? What other form of
drama could there be, if it was not to be born of the womb of music, in
the mysterious twilight of the Dionysian? Only _the dramatised epos:_
in which Apollonian domain of art the _tragic_ effect is of course
unattainable. It does not depend on the subject-matter of the events
here represented; indeed, I venture to assert that it would have been
impossible for Goethe in his projected "Nausikaa" to have rendered
tragically effective the suicide of the idyllic being with which he
intended to complete the fifth act; so extraordinary is the power of
the epic-Apollonian representation, that it charms, before our eyes,
the most terrible things by the joy in appearance and in redemption
through appearance. The poet of the dramatised epos cannot completely
blend with his pictures any more than the epic rhapsodist. He is still
just the calm, unmoved embodiment of Contemplation whose wide eyes see
the picture _before_ them. The actor in this dramatised epos still
remains intrinsically rhapsodist: the consecration of inner dreaming
is on all his actions, so that he is never wholly an actor.

How, then, is the Euripidean play related to this ideal of the
Apollonian drama? Just as the younger rhapsodist is related to the
solemn rhapsodist of the old time. The former describes his own
character in the Platonic "Ion" as follows: "When I am saying anything
sad, my eyes fill with tears; when, however, what I am saying is awful
and terrible, then my hair stands on end through fear, and my heart
leaps." Here we no longer observe anything of the epic absorption
in appearance, or of the unemotional coolness of the true actor,
who precisely in his highest activity is wholly appearance and joy
in appearance. Euripides is the actor with leaping heart, with hair
standing on end; as Socratic thinker he designs the plan, as passionate
actor he executes it. Neither in the designing nor in the execution is
he an artist pure and simple. And so the Euripidean drama is a thing
both cool and fiery, equally capable of freezing and burning; it is
impossible for it to attain the Apollonian, effect of the epos, while,
on the other hand, it has severed itself as much as possible from
Dionysian elements, and now, in order to act at all, it requires new
stimulants, which can no longer lie within the sphere of the two unique
art-impulses, the Apollonian and the Dionysian. The stimulants are
cool, paradoxical _thoughts_, in place of Apollonian intuitions--and
fiery _passions_--in place Dionysean ecstasies; and in fact, thoughts
and passions very realistically copied, and not at all steeped in the
ether of art.

Accordingly, if we have perceived this much, that Euripides did not
succeed in establishing the drama exclusively on the Apollonian, but
that rather his non-Dionysian inclinations deviated into a naturalistic
and inartistic tendency, we shall now be able to approach nearer to
the character _æsthetic Socratism._ supreme law of which reads about
as follows: "to be beautiful everything must be intelligible," as
the parallel to the Socratic proposition, "only the knowing is one
virtuous." With this canon in his hands Euripides measured all the
separate elements of the drama, and rectified them according to his
principle: the language, the characters, the dramaturgic structure, and
the choric music. The poetic deficiency and retrogression, which we
are so often wont to impute to Euripides in comparison with Sophoclean
tragedy, is for the most part the product of this penetrating critical
process, this daring intelligibility. The Euripidian _prologue_ may
serve us as an example of the productivity of this, rationalistic
method. Nothing could be more opposed to the technique of our stage
than the prologue in the drama of Euripides. For a single person to
appear at the outset of the play telling us who he is, what precedes
the action, what has happened thus far, yea, what will happen in
the course of the play, would be designated by a modern playwright
as a wanton and unpardonable abandonment of the effect of suspense.
Everything that is about to happen is known beforehand; who then
cares to wait for it actually to happen?--considering, moreover, that
here there is not by any means the exciting relation of a predicting
dream to a reality taking place later on. Euripides speculated quite
differently. The effect of tragedy never depended on epic suspense, on
the fascinating uncertainty as to what is to happen now and afterwards:
but rather on the great rhetoro-lyric scenes in which the passion and
dialectics of the chief hero swelled to a broad and mighty stream.
Everything was arranged for pathos, not for action: and whatever
was not arranged for pathos was regarded as objectionable. But what
interferes most with the hearer's pleasurable satisfaction in such
scenes is a missing link, a gap in the texture of the previous history.
So long as the spectator has to divine the meaning of this or that
person, or the presuppositions of this or that conflict of inclinations
and intentions, his complete absorption in the doings and sufferings
of the chief persons is impossible, as is likewise breathless
fellow-feeling and fellow-fearing. The Æschyleo-Sophoclean tragedy
employed the most ingenious devices in the first scenes to place in
the hands of the spectator as if by chance all the threads requisite
for understanding the whole: a trait in which that noble artistry is
approved, which as it were masks the _inevitably_ formal, and causes
it to appear as something accidental. But nevertheless Euripides
thought he observed that during these first scenes the spectator was
in a strange state of anxiety to make out the problem of the previous
history, so that the poetic beauties and pathos of the exposition
were lost to him. Accordingly he placed the prologue even before the
exposition, and put it in the mouth of a person who could be trusted:
some deity had often as it were to guarantee the particulars of the
tragedy to the public and remove every doubt as to the reality of the
myth: as in the case of Descartes, who could only prove the reality
of the empiric world by an appeal to the truthfulness of God and His
inability to utter falsehood. Euripides makes use of the same divine
truthfulness once more at the close of his drama, in order to ensure to
the public the future of his heroes; this is the task of the notorious
_deus ex machina._ Between the preliminary and the additional epic
spectacle there is the dramatico-lyric present, the "drama" proper.

Thus Euripides as a poet echoes above all his own conscious
knowledge; and it is precisely on this account that he occupies such
a notable position in the history of Greek art. With reference to his
critico-productive activity, he must often have felt that he ought
to actualise in the drama the words at the beginning of the essay of
Anaxagoras: "In the beginning all things were mixed together; then
came the understanding and created order." And if Anaxagoras with his
"νοῡς" seemed like the first sober person among nothing but drunken
philosophers, Euripides may also have conceived his relation to
the other tragic poets under a similar figure. As long as the sole
ruler and disposer of the universe, the νοῡς, was still excluded
from artistic activity, things were all mixed together in a chaotic,
primitive mess;--it is thus Euripides was obliged to think, it is thus
he was obliged to condemn the "drunken" poets as the first "sober" one
among them. What Sophocles said of Æschylus, that he did what was
right, though unconsciously, was surely not in the mind of Euripides:
who would have admitted only thus much, that Æschylus, _because_ he
wrought unconsciously, did what was wrong. So also the divine Plato
speaks for the most part only ironically of the creative faculty of the
poet, in so far as it is not conscious insight, and places it on a par
with the gift of the soothsayer and dream-interpreter; insinuating that
the poet is incapable of composing until he has become unconscious and
reason has deserted him. Like Plato, Euripides undertook to show to the
world the reverse of the "unintelligent" poet; his æsthetic principle
that "to be beautiful everything must be known" is, as I have said,
the parallel to the Socratic "to be good everything must be known."
Accordingly we may regard Euripides as the poet of æsthetic Socratism.
Socrates, however, was that _second spectator_ who did not comprehend
and therefore did not esteem the Old Tragedy; in alliance with him
Euripides ventured to be the herald of a new artistic activity. If,
then, the Old Tragedy was here destroyed, it follows that æsthetic
Socratism was the murderous principle; but in so far as the struggle is
directed against the Dionysian element in the old art, we recognise in
Socrates the opponent of Dionysus, the new Orpheus who rebels against
Dionysus; and although destined to be torn to pieces by the Mænads of
the Athenian court, yet puts to flight the overpowerful god himself,
who, when he fled from Lycurgus, the king of Edoni, sought refuge in
the depths of the ocean--namely, in the mystical flood of a secret
cult which gradually overspread the earth.



13.


That Socrates stood in close relationship to Euripides in the tendency
of his teaching, did not escape the notice of contemporaneous
antiquity; the most eloquent expression of this felicitous insight
being the tale current in Athens, that Socrates was accustomed to help
Euripides in poetising. Both names were mentioned in one breath by the
adherents of the "good old time," whenever they came to enumerating the
popular agitators of the day: to whose influence they attributed the
fact that the old Marathonian stalwart capacity of body and soul was
more and more being sacrificed to a dubious enlightenment, involving
progressive degeneration of the physical and mental powers. It is in
this tone, half indignantly and half contemptuously, that Aristophanic
comedy is wont to speak of both of them--to the consternation of
modern men, who would indeed be willing enough to give up Euripides,
but cannot suppress their amazement that Socrates should appear in
Aristophanes as the first and head _sophist,_ as the mirror and epitome
of all sophistical tendencies; in connection with which it offers the
single consolation of putting Aristophanes himself in the pillory, as a
rakish, lying Alcibiades of poetry. Without here defending the profound
instincts of Aristophanes against such attacks, I shall now indicate,
by means of the sentiments of the time, the close connection between
Socrates and Euripides. With this purpose in view, it is especially to
be remembered that Socrates, as an opponent of tragic art, did not
ordinarily patronise tragedy, but only appeared among the spectators
when a new play of Euripides was performed. The most noted thing,
however, is the close juxtaposition of the two names in the Delphic
oracle, which designated Socrates as the wisest of men, but at the same
time decided that the second prize in the contest of wisdom was due to
Euripides.

Sophocles was designated as the third in this scale of rank; he who
could pride himself that, in comparison with Æschylus, he did what
was right, and did it, moreover, because he _knew_ what was right. It
is evidently just the degree of clearness of this _knowledge,_ which
distinguishes these three men in common as the three "knowing ones" of
their age.

The most decisive word, however, for this new and unprecedented
esteem of knowledge and insight was spoken by Socrates when he
found that he was the only one who acknowledged to himself that he
_knew nothing_ while in his critical pilgrimage through Athens, and
calling on the greatest statesmen, orators, poets, and artists, he
discovered everywhere the conceit of knowledge. He perceived, to his
astonishment, that all these celebrities were without a proper and
accurate insight, even with regard to their own callings, and practised
them only by instinct. "Only by instinct": with this phrase we touch
upon the heart and core of the Socratic tendency. Socratism condemns
therewith existing art as well as existing ethics; wherever Socratism
turns its searching eyes it beholds the lack of insight and the
power of illusion; and from this lack infers the inner perversity and
objectionableness of existing conditions. From this point onwards,
Socrates believed that he was called upon to, correct existence;
and, with an air of disregard and superiority, as the precursor
of an altogether different culture, art, and morality, he enters
single-handed into a world, of which, if we reverently touched the hem,
we should count it our greatest happiness.

Here is the extraordinary hesitancy which always seizes upon us with
regard to Socrates, and again and again invites us to ascertain the
sense and purpose of this most questionable phenomenon of antiquity.
Who is it that ventures single-handed to disown the Greek character,
which, as Homer, Pindar, and Æschylus, as Phidias, as Pericles, as
Pythia and Dionysus, as the deepest abyss and the highest height, is
sure of our wondering admiration? What demoniac power is it which would
presume to spill this magic draught in the dust? What demigod is it to
whom the chorus of spirits of the noblest of mankind must call out:
"Weh! Weh! Du hast sie zerstört, die schöne Welt, mit mächtiger Faust;
sie stürzt, sie zerfällt!"[17]

A key to the character of Socrates is presented to us by the surprising
phenomenon designated as the "daimonion" of Socrates. In special
circumstances, when his gigantic intellect began to stagger, he got
a secure support in the utterances of a divine voice which then
spake to him. This voice, whenever it comes, always _dissuades._
In this totally abnormal nature instinctive wisdom only appears in
order to hinder the progress of conscious perception here and there.
While in all productive men it is instinct which is the creatively
affirmative force, consciousness only comporting itself critically
and dissuasively; with Socrates it is instinct which becomes critic;
it is consciousness which becomes creator--a perfect monstrosity
_per defectum!_ And we do indeed observe here a monstrous _defectus_
of all mystical aptitude, so that Socrates might be designated as
the specific _non-mystic,_ in whom the logical nature is developed,
through a superfoetation, to the same excess as instinctive wisdom
is developed in the mystic. On the other hand, however, the logical
instinct which appeared in Socrates was absolutely prohibited from
turning against itself; in its unchecked flow it manifests a native
power such as we meet with, to our shocking surprise, only among the
very greatest instinctive forces. He who has experienced even a breath
of the divine naïveté and security of the Socratic course of life in
the Platonic writings, will also feel that the enormous driving-wheel
of logical Socratism is in motion, as it were, _behind_ Socrates, and
that it must be viewed through Socrates as through a shadow. And
that he himself had a boding of this relation is apparent from the
dignified earnestness with which he everywhere, and even before his
judges, insisted on his divine calling. To refute him here was really
as impossible as to approve of his instinct-disintegrating influence.
In view of this indissoluble conflict, when he had at last been brought
before the forum of the Greek state, there was only one punishment
demanded, namely exile; he might have been sped across the borders as
something thoroughly enigmatical, irrubricable and inexplicable, and so
posterity would have been quite unjustified in charging the Athenians
with a deed of ignominy. But that the sentence of death, and not mere
exile, was pronounced upon him, seems to have been brought about by
Socrates himself, with perfect knowledge of the circumstances, and
without the natural fear of death: he met his death with the calmness
with which, according to the description of Plato, he leaves the
symposium at break of day, as the last of the revellers, to begin a new
day; while the sleepy companions remain behind on the benches and the
floor, to dream of Socrates, the true eroticist. _The dying Socrates_
became the new ideal of the noble Greek youths,--an ideal they had
never yet beheld,--and above all, the typical Hellenic youth, Plato,
prostrated himself before this scene with all the fervent devotion of
his visionary soul.


[17]

    Woe! Woe!
    Thou hast it destroyed,
    The beautiful world;
    With powerful fist;
    In ruin 'tis hurled!
    _Faust,_ trans. of Bayard Taylor.--TR.



14.


Let us now imagine the one great Cyclopean eye of Socrates fixed on
tragedy, that eye in which the fine frenzy of artistic enthusiasm had
never glowed--let us think how it was denied to this eye to gaze with
pleasure into the Dionysian abysses--what could it not but see in the
"sublime and greatly lauded" tragic art, as Plato called it? Something
very absurd, with causes that seemed to be without effects, and
effects apparently without causes; the whole, moreover, so motley and
diversified that it could not but be repugnant to a thoughtful mind, a
dangerous incentive, however, to sensitive and irritable souls. We know
what was the sole kind of poetry which he comprehended: the _Æsopian
fable_: and he did this no doubt with that smiling complaisance with
which the good honest Gellert sings the praise of poetry in the fable
of the bee and the hen:--

    "Du siehst an mir, wozu sie nützt,
    Dem, der nicht viel Verstand besitzt,
    Die Wahrheit durch ein Bild zu sagen."[18]

But then it seemed to Socrates that tragic art did not even "tell the
truth": not to mention the fact that it addresses itself to him who
"hath but little wit"; consequently not to the philosopher: a twofold
reason why it should be avoided. Like Plato, he reckoned it among the
seductive arts which only represent the agreeable, not the useful, and
hence he required of his disciples abstinence and strict separation
from such unphilosophical allurements; with such success that the
youthful tragic poet Plato first of all burned his poems to be able to
become a scholar of Socrates. But where unconquerable native capacities
bore up against the Socratic maxims, their power, together with the
momentum of his mighty character, still sufficed to force poetry itself
into new and hitherto unknown channels.

An instance of this is the aforesaid Plato: he, who in the condemnation
of tragedy and of art in general certainly did not fall short of
the naïve cynicism of his master, was nevertheless constrained by
sheer artistic necessity to create a form of art which is inwardly
related even to the then existing forms of art which he repudiated.
Plato's main objection to the old art--that it is the imitation of
a phantom,[19] and hence belongs to a sphere still lower than the
empiric world--could not at all apply to the new art: and so we find
Plato endeavouring to go beyond reality and attempting to represent
the idea which underlies this pseudo-reality. But Plato, the thinker,
thereby arrived by a roundabout road just at the point where he had
always been at home as poet, and from which Sophocles and all the old
artists had solemnly protested against that objection. If tragedy
absorbed into itself all the earlier varieties of art, the same
could again be said in an unusual sense of Platonic dialogue, which,
engendered by a mixture of all the then existing forms and styles,
hovers midway between narrative, lyric and drama, between prose and
poetry, and has also thereby broken loose from the older strict law
of unity of linguistic form; a movement which was carried still
farther by the _cynic_ writers, who in the most promiscuous style,
oscillating to and fro betwixt prose and metrical forms, realised also
the literary picture of the "raving Socrates" whom they were wont to
represent in life. Platonic dialogue was as it were the boat in which
the shipwrecked ancient poetry saved herself together with all her
children: crowded into a narrow space and timidly obsequious to the
one steersman, Socrates, they now launched into a new world, which
never tired of looking at the fantastic spectacle of this procession.
In very truth, Plato has given to all posterity the prototype of a new
form of art, the prototype of the _novel_ which must be designated as
the infinitely evolved Æsopian fable, in which poetry holds the same
rank with reference to dialectic philosophy as this same philosophy
held for many centuries with reference to theology: namely, the rank of
_ancilla._ This was the new position of poetry into which Plato forced
it under the pressure of the demon-inspired Socrates.

Here _philosophic thought_ overgrows art and compels it to cling close
to the trunk of dialectics. The _Apollonian_ tendency has chrysalised
in the logical schematism; just as something analogous in the case
of Euripides (and moreover a translation of the _Dionysian_ into the
naturalistic emotion) was forced upon our attention. Socrates, the
dialectical hero in Platonic drama, reminds us of the kindred nature
of the Euripidean hero, who has to defend his actions by arguments and
counter-arguments, and thereby so often runs the risk of forfeiting
our tragic pity; for who could mistake the _optimistic_ element
in the essence of dialectics, which celebrates a jubilee in every
conclusion, and can breathe only in cool clearness and consciousness:
the optimistic element, which, having once forced its way into tragedy,
must gradually overgrow its Dionysian regions, and necessarily impel it
to self-destruction--even to the death-leap into the bourgeois drama.
Let us but realise the consequences of the Socratic maxims: "Virtue is
knowledge; man only sins from ignorance; he who is virtuous is happy":
these three fundamental forms of optimism involve the death of tragedy.
For the virtuous hero must now be a dialectician; there must now be a
necessary, visible connection between virtue and knowledge, between
belief and morality; the transcendental justice of the plot in Æschylus
is now degraded to the superficial and audacious principle of poetic
justice with its usual _deus ex machina_.

How does the _chorus,_ and, in general, the entire Dionyso-musical
substratum of tragedy, now appear in the light of this new
Socrato-optimistic stage-world? As something accidental, as a readily
dispensable reminiscence of the origin of tragedy; while we have
in fact seen that the chorus can be understood only as the cause of
tragedy, and of the tragic generally. This perplexity with respect to
the chorus first manifests itself in Sophocles--an important sign that
the Dionysian basis of tragedy already begins to disintegrate with
him. He no longer ventures to entrust to the chorus the main share
of the effect, but limits its sphere to such an extent that it now
appears almost co-ordinate with the actors, just as if it were elevated
from the orchestra into the scene: whereby of course its character
is completely destroyed, notwithstanding that Aristotle countenances
this very theory of the chorus. This alteration of the position of
the chorus, which Sophocles at any rate recommended by his practice,
and, according to tradition, even by a treatise, is the first step
towards the _annihilation_ of the chorus, the phases of which follow
one another with alarming rapidity in Euripides, Agathon, and the New
Comedy. Optimistic dialectics drives, _music_ out of tragedy with the
scourge of its syllogisms: that is, it destroys the essence of tragedy,
which can be explained only as a manifestation and illustration of
Dionysian states, as the visible symbolisation of music, as the
dream-world of Dionysian ecstasy.

If, therefore, we are to assume an anti-Dionysian tendency operating
even before Socrates, which received in him only an unprecedentedly
grand expression, we must not shrink from the question as to what
a phenomenon like that of Socrates indicates: whom in view of the
Platonic dialogues we are certainly not entitled to regard as a purely
disintegrating, negative power. And though there can be no doubt
whatever that the most immediate effect of the Socratic impulse tended
to the dissolution of Dionysian tragedy, yet a profound experience of
Socrates' own life compels us to ask whether there is _necessarily_
only an antipodal relation between Socratism and art, and whether the
birth of an "artistic Socrates" is in general something contradictory
in itself.

For that despotic logician had now and then the feeling of a gap, or
void, a sentiment of semi-reproach, as of a possibly neglected duty
with respect to art. There often came to him, as he tells his friends
in prison, one and the same dream-apparition, which kept constantly
repeating to him: "Socrates, practise music." Up to his very last days
he solaces himself with the opinion that his philosophising is the
highest form of poetry, and finds it hard to believe that a deity will
remind him of the "common, popular music." Finally, when in prison,
he consents to practise also this despised music, in order thoroughly
to unburden his conscience. And in this frame of mind he composes
a poem on Apollo and turns a few Æsopian fables into verse. It was
something similar to the demonian warning voice which urged him to
these practices; it was because of his Apollonian insight that, like a
barbaric king, he did not understand the noble image of a god and was
in danger of sinning against a deity--through ignorance. The prompting
voice of the Socratic dream-vision is the only sign of doubtfulness
as to the limits of logical nature. "Perhaps "--thus he had to ask
himself--"what is not intelligible to me is not therefore unreasonable?
Perhaps there is a realm of wisdom from which the logician is banished?
Perhaps art is even a necessary correlative of and supplement to
science?"


[18]

    In me thou seest its benefit,--
    To him who hath but little wit,
    Through parables to tell the truth.

[19] Scheinbild = ειδολον.--TR.



15.


In the sense of these last portentous questions it must now be
indicated how the influence of Socrates (extending to the present
moment, indeed, to all futurity) has spread over posterity like an
ever-increasing shadow in the evening sun, and how this influence
again and again necessitates a regeneration of _art,_--yea, of art
already with metaphysical, broadest and profoundest sense,--and its own
eternity guarantees also the eternity of art.

Before this could be perceived, before the intrinsic dependence of
every art on the Greeks, the Greeks from Homer to Socrates, was
conclusively demonstrated, it had to happen to us with regard to these
Greeks as it happened to the Athenians with regard to Socrates. Nearly
every age and stage of culture has at some time or other sought with
deep displeasure to free itself from the Greeks, because in their
presence everything self-achieved, sincerely admired and apparently
quite original, seemed all of a sudden to lose life and colour
and shrink to an abortive copy, even to caricature. And so hearty
indignation breaks forth time after time against this presumptuous
little nation, which dared to designate as "barbaric" for all time
everything not native: who are they, one asks one's self, who, though
they possessed only an ephemeral historical splendour, ridiculously
restricted institutions, a dubious excellence in their customs, and
were even branded with ugly vices, yet lay claim to the dignity and
singular position among the peoples to which genius is entitled among
the masses. What a pity one has not been so fortunate as to find the
cup of hemlock with which such an affair could be disposed of without
ado: for all the poison which envy, calumny, and rankling resentment
engendered within themselves have not sufficed to destroy that
self-sufficient grandeur! And so one feels ashamed and afraid in the
presence of the Greeks: unless one prize truth above all things, and
dare also to acknowledge to one's self this truth, that the Greeks,
as charioteers, hold in their hands the reins of our own and of
every culture, but that almost always chariot and horses are of too
poor material and incommensurate with the glory of their guides, who
then will deem it sport to run such a team into an abyss: which they
themselves clear with the leap of Achilles.

In order to assign also to Socrates the dignity of such a leading
position, it will suffice to recognise in him the type of an unheard-of
form of existence, the type of the _theoretical man,_ with regard
to whose meaning and purpose it will be our next task to attain
an insight. Like the artist, the theorist also finds an infinite
satisfaction in what _is_ and, like the former, he is shielded by this
satisfaction from the practical ethics of pessimism with its lynx eyes
which shine only in the dark. For if the artist in every unveiling
of truth always cleaves with raptured eyes only to that which still
remains veiled after the unveiling, the theoretical man, on the other
hand, enjoys and contents himself with the cast-off veil, and finds
the consummation of his pleasure in the process of a continuously
successful unveiling through his own unaided efforts. There would
have been no science if it had only been concerned about that _one_
naked goddess and nothing else. For then its disciples would have been
obliged to feel like those who purposed to dig a hole straight through
the earth: each one of whom perceives that with the utmost lifelong
exertion he is able to excavate only a very little of the enormous
depth, which is again filled up before his eyes by the labours of his
successor, so that a third man seems to do well when on his own account
he selects a new spot for his attempts at tunnelling. If now some one
proves conclusively that the antipodal goal cannot be attained in this
direct way, who will still care to toil on in the old depths, unless he
has learned to content himself in the meantime with finding precious
stones or discovering natural laws? For that reason Lessing, the most
honest theoretical man, ventured to say that he cared more for the
search after truth than for truth itself: in saying which he revealed
the fundamental secret of science, to the astonishment, and indeed,
to the vexation of scientific men. Well, to be sure, there stands
alongside of this detached perception, as an excess of honesty, if not
of presumption, a profound _illusion_ which first came to the world
in the person of Socrates, the imperturbable belief that, by means
of the clue of causality, thinking reaches to the deepest abysses of
being, and that thinking is able not only to perceive being but even
to _correct_ it. This sublime metaphysical illusion is added as an
instinct to science and again and again leads the latter to its limits,
where it must change into _art; which is really the end, to be attained
by this mechanism_.

If we now look at Socrates in the light of this thought, he appears to
us as the first who could not only live, but--what is far more--also
die under the guidance of this instinct of science: and hence the
picture of the _dying, Socrates_, as the man delivered from the fear of
death by knowledge and argument, is the escutcheon, above the entrance
to science which reminds every one of its mission, namely, to make
existence appear to be comprehensible, and therefore to be justified:
for which purpose, if arguments do not suffice, _myth_ also must be
used, which I just now designated even as the necessary consequence,
yea, as the end of science.

He who once makes intelligible to himself how, after the death of
Socrates, the mystagogue of science, one philosophical school succeeds
another, like wave upon wave,--how an entirely unfore-shadowed
universal development of the thirst for knowledge in the widest
compass of the cultured world (and as the specific task for every
one highly gifted) led science on to the high sea from which since
then it has never again been able to be completely ousted; how
through the universality of this movement a common net of thought
was first stretched over the entire globe, with prospects, moreover,
of conformity to law in an entire solar system;--he who realises all
this, together with the amazingly high pyramid of our present-day
knowledge, cannot fail to see in Socrates the turning-point and vortex
of so-called universal history. For if one were to imagine the whole
incalculable sum of energy which has been used up by that universal
tendency,--employed, _not_ in the service of knowledge, but for the
practical, _i.e.,_ egoistical ends of individuals and peoples,--then
probably the instinctive love of life would be so much weakened in
universal wars of destruction and incessant migrations of peoples,
that, owing to the practice of suicide, the individual would perhaps
feel the last remnant of a sense of duty, when, like the native of
the Fiji Islands, as son he strangles his parents and, as friend, his
friend: a practical pessimism which might even give rise to a horrible
ethics of general slaughter out of pity--which, for the rest, exists
and has existed wherever art in one form or another, especially as
science and religion, has not appeared as a remedy and preventive of
that pestilential breath.

In view of this practical pessimism, Socrates is the archetype of
the theoretical optimist, who in the above-indicated belief in the
fathomableness of the nature of things, attributes to knowledge and
perception the power of a universal medicine, and sees in error and
evil. To penetrate into the depths of the nature of things, and to
separate true perception from error and illusion, appeared to the
Socratic man the noblest and even the only truly human calling: just as
from the time of Socrates onwards the mechanism of concepts, judgments,
and inferences was prized above all other capacities as the highest
activity and the most admirable gift of nature. Even the sublimest
moral acts, the stirrings of pity, of self-sacrifice, of heroism,
and that tranquillity of soul, so difficult of attainment, which the
Apollonian Greek called Sophrosyne, were derived by Socrates, and his
like-minded successors up to the present day, from the dialectics of
knowledge, and were accordingly designated as teachable. He who has
experienced in himself the joy of a Socratic perception, and felt how
it seeks to embrace, in constantly widening circles, the entire world
of phenomena, will thenceforth find no stimulus which could urge him
to existence more forcible than the desire to complete that conquest
and to knit the net impenetrably close. To a person thus minded the
Platonic Socrates then appears as the teacher of an entirely new form
of "Greek cheerfulness" and felicity of existence, which seeks to
discharge itself in actions, and will find its discharge for the most
part in maieutic and pedagogic influences on noble youths, with a view
to the ultimate production of genius.

But now science, spurred on by its powerful illusion, hastens
irresistibly to its limits, on which its optimism, hidden in the
essence of logic, is wrecked. For the periphery of the circle of
science has an infinite number of points, and while there is still no
telling how this circle can ever be completely measured, yet the noble
and gifted man, even before the middle of his career, inevitably comes
into contact with those extreme points of the periphery where he stares
at the inexplicable. When he here sees to his dismay how logic coils
round itself at these limits and finally bites its own tail--then the
new form of perception discloses itself, namely _tragic perception,_
which, in order even to be endured, requires art as a safeguard and
remedy.

If, with eyes strengthened and refreshed at the sight of the Greeks, we
look upon the highest spheres of the world that surrounds us, we behold
the avidity of the insatiate optimistic knowledge, of which Socrates is
the typical representative, transformed into tragic resignation and the
need of art: while, to be sure, this same avidity, in its lower stages,
has to exhibit itself as antagonistic to art, and must especially have
an inward detestation of Dionyso-tragic art, as was exemplified in the
opposition of Socratism to Æschylean tragedy.

Here then with agitated spirit we knock at the gates of the present and
the future: will that "transforming" lead to ever new configurations
of genius, and especially of the _music-practising Socrates_? Will the
net of art which is spread over existence, whether under the name of
religion or of science, be knit always more closely and delicately,
or is it destined to be torn to shreds under the restlessly barbaric
activity and whirl which is called "the present day"?--Anxious, yet
not disconsolate, we stand aloof for a little while, as the spectators
who are permitted to be witnesses of these tremendous struggles and
transitions. Alas! It is the charm of these struggles that he who
beholds them must also fight them!



16.


By this elaborate historical example we have endeavoured to make it
clear that tragedy perishes as surely by evanescence of the spirit of
music as it can be born only out of this spirit. In order to qualify
the singularity of this assertion, and, on the other hand, to disclose
the source of this insight of ours, we must now confront with clear
vision the analogous phenomena of the present time; we must enter
into the midst of these struggles, which, as I said just now, are
being carried on in the highest spheres of our present world between
the insatiate optimistic perception and the tragic need of art. In
so doing I shall leave out of consideration all other antagonistic
tendencies which at all times oppose art, especially tragedy, and which
at present again extend their sway triumphantly, to such an extent that
of the theatrical arts only the farce and the ballet, for example, put
forth their blossoms, which perhaps not every one cares to smell, in
tolerably rich luxuriance. I will speak only of the _Most Illustrious
Opposition_ to the tragic conception of things--and by this I mean
essentially optimistic science, with its ancestor Socrates at the head
of it. Presently also the forces will be designated which seem to me
to guarantee _a re-birth of tragedy_--and who knows what other blessed
hopes for the German genius!

Before we plunge into the midst of these struggles, let us array
ourselves in the armour of our hitherto acquired knowledge. In
contrast to all those who are intent on deriving the arts from one
exclusive principle, as the necessary vital source of every work of
art, I keep my eyes fixed on the two artistic deities of the Greeks,
Apollo and Dionysus, and recognise in them the living and conspicuous
representatives of _two_ worlds of art which differ in their intrinsic
essence and in their highest aims. Apollo stands before me as the
transfiguring genius of the _principium individuationis_ through
which alone the redemption in appearance is to be truly attained,
while by the mystical cheer of Dionysus the spell of individuation
is broken, and the way lies open to the Mothers of Being,[20] to the
innermost heart of things. This extraordinary antithesis, which opens
up yawningly between plastic art as the Apollonian and music as the
Dionysian art, has become manifest to only one of the great thinkers,
to such an extent that, even without this key to the symbolism of the
Hellenic divinities, he allowed to music a different character and
origin in advance of all the other arts, because, unlike them, it is
not a copy of the phenomenon, but a direct copy of the will itself, and
therefore represents _the metaphysical of everything physical in the
world_, the thing-in-itself of every phenomenon. (Schopenhauer, _Welt
als Wille und Vorstellung,_ I. 310.) To this most important perception
of æsthetics (with which, taken in a serious sense, æsthetics properly
commences), Richard Wagner, by way of confirmation of its eternal
truth, affixed his seal, when he asserted in his _Beethoven_ that
music must be judged according to æsthetic principles quite different
from those which apply to the plastic arts, and not, in general,
according to the category of beauty: although an erroneous æsthetics,
inspired by a misled and degenerate art, has by virtue of the concept
of beauty prevailing in the plastic domain accustomed itself to demand
of music an effect analogous to that of the works of plastic art,
namely the suscitating _delight in beautiful forms._ Upon perceiving
this extraordinary antithesis, I felt a strong inducement to approach
the essence of Greek tragedy, and, by means of it, the profoundest
revelation of Hellenic genius: for I at last thought myself to be in
possession of a charm to enable me--far beyond the phraseology of our
usual æsthetics--to represent vividly to my mind the primitive problem
of tragedy: whereby such an astounding insight into the Hellenic
character was afforded me that it necessarily seemed as if our proudly
comporting classico-Hellenic science had thus far contrived to subsist
almost exclusively on phantasmagoria and externalities.

Perhaps we may lead up to this primitive problem with the question:
what æsthetic effect results when the intrinsically separate
art-powers, the Apollonian and the Dionysian, enter into concurrent
actions? Or, in briefer form: how is music related to image and
concept?--Schopenhauer, whom Richard Wagner, with especial reference to
this point, accredits with an unsurpassable clearness and perspicuity
of exposition, expresses himself most copiously on the subject in
the following passage which I shall cite here at full length[21]
(_Welt als Wille und Vorstellung,_ I. p. 309): "According to all
this, we may regard the phenomenal world, or nature, and music as
two different expressions of the same thing,[20] which is therefore
itself the only medium of the analogy between these two expressions,
so that a knowledge of this medium is required in order to understand
that analogy. Music, therefore, if regarded as an expression of the
world, is in the highest degree a universal language, which is related
indeed to the universality of concepts, much as these are related to
the particular things. Its universality, however, is by no means the
empty universality of abstraction, but of quite a different kind, and
is united with thorough and distinct definiteness. In this respect it
resembles geometrical figures and numbers, which are the universal
forms of all possible objects of experience and applicable to them all
_a priori_, and yet are not abstract but perceptiple and thoroughly
determinate. All possible efforts, excitements and manifestations of
will, all that goes on in the heart of man and that reason includes in
the wide, negative concept of feeling, may be expressed by the infinite
number of possible melodies, but always in the universality of mere
form, without the material, always according to the thing-in-itself,
not the phenomenon,--of which they reproduce the very soul and essence
as it were, without the body. This deep relation which music bears to
the true nature of all things also explains the fact that suitable
music played to any scene, action, event, or surrounding seems to
disclose to us its most secret meaning, and appears as the most
accurate and distinct commentary upon it; as also the fact that whoever
gives himself up entirely to the impression of a symphony seems to see
all the possible events of life and the world take place in himself:
nevertheless upon reflection he can find no likeness between the music
and the things that passed before his mind. For, as we have said, music
is distinguished from all the other arts by the fact that it is not a
copy of the phenomenon, or, more accurately, the adequate objectivity
of the will, but the direct copy of the will itself, and therefore
represents the metaphysical of everything physical in the world, and
the thing-in-itself of every phenomenon. We might, therefore, just as
well call the world embodied music as embodied will: and this is the
reason why music makes every picture, and indeed every scene of real
life and of the world, at once appear with higher significance; all the
more so, to be sure, in proportion as its melody is analogous to the
inner spirit of the given phenomenon. It rests upon this that we are
able to set a poem to music as a song, or a perceptible representation
as a pantomime, or both as an opera. Such particular pictures of human
life, set to the universal language of music, are never bound to it
or correspond to it with stringent necessity, but stand to it only
in the relation of an example chosen at will to a general concept.
In the determinateness of the real they represent that which music
expresses in the universality of mere form. For melodies are to a
certain extent, like general concepts, an abstraction from the actual.
This actual world, then, the world of particular things, affords the
object of perception, the special and the individual, the particular
case, both to the universality of concepts and to the universality of
the melodies. But these two universalities are in a certain respect
opposed to each other; for the concepts contain only the forms, which
are first of all abstracted from perception,--the separated outward
shell of things, as it were,--and hence they are, in the strictest
sense of the term, _abstracta_; music, on the other hand, gives the
inmost kernel which precedes all forms, or the heart of things. This
relation may be very well expressed in the language of the schoolmen,
by saying: the concepts are the _universalia post rem,_ but music gives
the _universalia ante rem,_ and the real world the _universalia in
re._--But that in general a relation is possible between a composition
and a perceptible representation rests, as we have said, upon the
fact that both are simply different expressions of the same inner
being of the world. When now, in the particular case, such a relation
is actually given, that is to say, when the composer has been able to
express in the universal language of music the emotions of will which
constitute the heart of an event, then the melody of the song, the
music of the opera, is expressive. But the analogy discovered by the
composer between the two must have proceeded from the direct knowledge
of the nature of the world unknown to his reason, and must not be an
imitation produced with conscious intention by means of conceptions;
otherwise the music does not express the inner nature of the will
itself, but merely gives an inadequate imitation of its phenomenon: all
specially imitative music does this."

We have therefore, according to the doctrine of Schopenhauer, an
immediate understanding of music as the language of the will, and
feel our imagination stimulated to give form to this invisible and
yet so actively stirred spirit-world which speaks to us, and prompted
to embody it in an analogous example. On the other hand, image and
concept, under the influence of a truly conformable music, acquire a
higher significance. Dionysian art therefore is wont to exercise--two
kinds of influences, on the Apollonian art-faculty: music firstly
incites to the _symbolic intuition_ of Dionysian universality, and,
secondly, it causes the symbolic image to stand forth _in its fullest
significance._ From these facts, intelligible in themselves and not
inaccessible to profounder observation, I infer the capacity of music
to give birth to _myth,_ that is to say, the most significant exemplar,
and precisely _tragic_ myth: the myth which speaks of Dionysian
knowledge in symbols. In the phenomenon of the lyrist, I have set forth
that in him music strives to express itself with regard to its nature
in Apollonian images. If now we reflect that music in its highest
potency must seek to attain also to its highest symbolisation, we must
deem it possible that it also knows how to find the symbolic expression
of its inherent Dionysian wisdom; and where shall we have to seek for
this expression if not in tragedy and, in general, in the conception of
the _tragic_?

From the nature of art, as it is ordinarily conceived according to
the single category of appearance and beauty, the tragic cannot be
honestly deduced at all; it is only through the spirit of music that
we understand the joy in the annihilation of the individual. For in
the particular examples of such annihilation only is the eternal
phenomenon of Dionysian art made clear to us, which gives expression
to the will in its omnipotence, as it were, behind the _principium
individuationis,_ the eternal life beyond all phenomena, and in
spite of all annihilation. The metaphysical delight in the tragic
is a translation of the instinctively unconscious Dionysian wisdom
into the language of the scene: the hero, the highest manifestation
of the will, is disavowed for our pleasure, because he is only
phenomenon, and because the eternal life of the will is not affected
by his annihilation. "We believe in eternal life," tragedy exclaims;
while music is the proximate idea of this life. Plastic art has an
altogether different object: here Apollo vanquishes the suffering of
the individual by the radiant glorification of the _eternity of the
phenomenon_; here beauty triumphs over the suffering inherent in life;
pain is in a manner surreptitiously obliterated from the features of
nature. In Dionysian art and its tragic symbolism the same nature
speaks to us with its true undissembled voice: "Be as I am! Amidst the
ceaseless change of phenomena the eternally creative primordial mother,
eternally impelling to existence, self-satisfying eternally with this
change of phenomena!"


[20] Cf. _World and Will as Idea,_ I. p. 339, trans. by
Haldane and Kemp.

[21] That is "the will" as understood by Schopenhauer.--TR.



17.


Dionysian art, too, seeks to convince us of the eternal joy of
existence: only we are to seek this joy not in phenomena, but behind
phenomena. We are to perceive how all that comes into being must be
ready for a sorrowful end; we are compelled to look into the terrors of
individual existence--yet we are not to become torpid: a metaphysical
comfort tears us momentarily from the bustle of the transforming
figures. We are really for brief moments Primordial Being itself,
and feel its indomitable desire for being and joy in existence; the
struggle, the pain, the destruction of phenomena, now appear to us as
something necessary, considering the surplus of innumerable forms of
existence which throng and push one another into life, considering
the exuberant fertility of the universal will. We are pierced by the
maddening sting of these pains at the very moment when we have become,
as it were, one with the immeasurable primordial joy in existence,
and when we anticipate, in Dionysian ecstasy, the indestructibility
and eternity of this joy. In spite of fear and pity, we are the happy
living beings, not as individuals, but as the _one_ living being, with
whose procreative joy we are blended.

The history of the rise of Greek tragedy now tells us with luminous
precision that the tragic art of the Greeks was really born of the
spirit of music: with which conception we believe we have done justice
for the first time to the original and most astonishing significance of
the chorus. At the same time, however, we must admit that the import of
tragic myth as set forth above never became transparent with sufficient
lucidity to the Greek poets, let alone the Greek philosophers; their
heroes speak, as it were, more superficially than they act; the myth
does not at all find its adequate objectification in the spoken word.
The structure of the scenes and the conspicuous images reveal a deeper
wisdom than the poet himself can put into words and concepts: the same
being also observed in Shakespeare, whose Hamlet, for instance, in an
analogous manner talks more superficially than he acts, so that the
previously mentioned lesson of Hamlet is to be gathered not from his
words, but from a more profound contemplation and survey of the whole.
With respect to Greek tragedy, which of course presents itself to us
only as word-drama, I have even intimated that the incongruence between
myth and expression might easily tempt us to regard it as shallower
and less significant than it really is, and accordingly to postulate
for it a more superficial effect than it must have had according to
the testimony of the ancients: for how easily one forgets that what
the word-poet did not succeed in doing, namely realising the highest
spiritualisation and ideality of myth, he might succeed in doing
every moment as creative musician! We require, to be sure, almost by
philological method to reconstruct for ourselves the ascendency of
musical influence in order to receive something of the incomparable
comfort which must be characteristic of true tragedy. Even this musical
ascendency, however, would only have been felt by us as such had
we been Greeks: while in the entire development of Greek music--as
compared with the infinitely richer music known and familiar to us--we
imagine we hear only the youthful song of the musical genius intoned
with a feeling of diffidence. The Greeks are, as the Egyptian priests
say, eternal children, and in tragic art also they are only children
who do not know what a sublime play-thing has originated under their
hands and--is being demolished.

That striving of the spirit of music for symbolic and mythical
manifestation, which increases from the beginnings of lyric poetry to
Attic tragedy, breaks off all of a sudden immediately after attaining
luxuriant development, and disappears, as it were, from the surface
of Hellenic art: while the Dionysian view of things born of this
striving lives on in Mysteries and, in its strangest metamorphoses and
debasements, does not cease to attract earnest natures. Will it not one
day rise again as art out of its mystic depth?

Here the question occupies us, whether the power by the counteracting
influence of which tragedy perished, has for all time strength enough
to prevent the artistic reawaking of tragedy and of the tragic view
of things. If ancient tragedy was driven from its course by the
dialectical desire for knowledge and the optimism of science, it might
be inferred that there is an eternal conflict between _the theoretic_
and _the tragic view of things,_ and only after the spirit of science
has been led to its boundaries, and its claim to universal validity
has been destroyed by the evidence of these boundaries, can we hope
for a re-birth of tragedy: for which form of culture we should have to
use the symbol _of the music-practising Socrates_ in the sense spoken
of above. In this contrast, I understand by the spirit of science the
belief which first came to light in the person of Socrates,--the belief
in the fathomableness of nature and in knowledge as a panacea.

He who recalls the immediate consequences of this restlessly
onward-pressing spirit of science will realise at once that _myth_
was annihilated by it, and that, in consequence of this annihilation,
poetry was driven as a homeless being from her natural ideal soil.
If we have rightly assigned to music the capacity to reproduce myth
from itself, we may in turn expect to find the spirit of science on
the path where it inimically opposes this mythopoeic power of music.
This takes place in the development of the _New Attic Dithyramb,_ the
music of which no longer expressed the inner essence, the will itself,
but only rendered the phenomenon insufficiently, in an imitation by
means of concepts; from which intrinsically degenerate music the truly
musical natures turned away with the same repugnance that they felt
for the art-destroying tendency of Socrates. The unerring instinct of
Aristophanes surely did the proper thing when it comprised Socrates
himself, the tragedy of Euripides, and the music of the new Dithyrambic
poets in the same feeling of hatred, and perceived in all three
phenomena the symptoms of a degenerate culture. By this New Dithyramb,
music has in an outrageous manner been made the imitative portrait of
phenomena, for instance, of a battle or a storm at sea, and has thus,
of course, been entirely deprived of its mythopoeic power. For if it
endeavours to excite our delight only by compelling us to seek external
analogies between a vital or natural process and certain rhythmical
figures and characteristic sounds of music; if our understanding is
expected to satisfy itself with the perception of these analogies, we
are reduced to a frame of mind in which the reception of the mythical
is impossible; for the myth as a unique exemplar of generality
and truth towering into the infinite, desires to be conspicuously
perceived. The truly Dionysean music presents itself to us as such
a general mirror of the universal will: the conspicuous event which
is refracted in this mirror expands at once for our consciousness to
the copy of an eternal truth. Conversely, such a conspicious event is
at once divested of every mythical character by the tone-painting
of the New Dithyramb; music has here become a wretched copy of the
phenomenon, and therefore infinitely poorer than the phenomenon itself:
through which poverty it still further reduces even the phenomenon for
our consciousness, so that now, for instance, a musically imitated
battle of this sort exhausts itself in marches, signal-sounds, etc.,
and our imagination is arrested precisely by these superficialities.
Tone-painting is therefore in every respect the counterpart of true
music with its mythopoeic power: through it the phenomenon, poor in
itself, is made still poorer, while through an isolated Dionysian music
the phenomenon is evolved and expanded into a picture of the world.
It was an immense triumph of the non-Dionysian spirit, when, in the
development of the New Dithyramb, it had estranged music from itself
and reduced it to be the slave of phenomena. Euripides, who, albeit in
a higher sense, must be designated as a thoroughly unmusical nature,
is for this very reason a passionate adherent of the New Dithyrambic
Music, and with the liberality of a freebooter employs all its
effective turns and mannerisms.

In another direction also we see at work the power of this
un-Dionysian, myth-opposing spirit, when we turn our eyes to the
prevalence of _character representation_ and psychological refinement
from Sophocles onwards. The character must no longer be expanded into
an eternal type, but, on the contrary, must operate individually
through artistic by-traits and shadings, through the nicest precision
of all lines, in such a manner that the spectator is in general no
longer conscious of the myth, but of the mighty nature-myth and the
imitative power of the artist. Here also we observe the victory of
the phenomenon over the Universal, and the delight in the particular
quasi-anatomical preparation; we actually breathe the air of a
theoretical world, in which scientific knowledge is valued more highly
than the artistic reflection of a universal law. The movement along
the line of the representation of character proceeds rapidly: while
Sophocles still delineates complete characters and employs myth for
their refined development, Euripides already delineates only prominent
individual traits of character, which can express themselves in violent
bursts of passion; in the New Attic Comedy, however, there are only
masks with _one_ expression: frivolous old men, duped panders, and
cunning slaves in untiring repetition. Where now is the mythopoeic
spirit of music? What is still left now of music is either excitatory
music or souvenir music, that is, either a stimulant for dull and
used-up nerves, or tone-painting. As regards the former, it hardly
matters about the text set to it: the heroes and choruses of Euripides
are already dissolute enough when once they begin to sing; to what pass
must things have come with his brazen successors?

The new un-Dionysian spirit, however, manifests itself most clearly in
the _dénouements_ of the new dramas. In the Old Tragedy one could feel
at the close the metaphysical comfort, without which the delight in
tragedy cannot be explained at all; the conciliating tones from another
world sound purest, perhaps, in the Œdipus at Colonus. Now that the
genius of music has fled from tragedy, tragedy is, strictly speaking,
dead: for from whence could one now draw the metaphysical comfort? One
sought, therefore, for an earthly unravelment of the tragic dissonance;
the hero, after he had been sufficiently tortured by fate, reaped a
well-deserved reward through a superb marriage or divine tokens of
favour. The hero had turned gladiator, on whom, after being liberally
battered about and covered with wounds, freedom was occasionally
bestowed. The _deus ex machina_ took the place of metaphysical comfort.
I will not say that the tragic view of things was everywhere completely
destroyed by the intruding spirit of the un-Dionysian: we only know
that it was compelled to flee from art into the under-world as it were,
in the degenerate form of a secret cult. Over the widest extent of the
Hellenic character, however, there raged the consuming blast of this
spirit, which manifests itself in the form of "Greek cheerfulness,"
which we have already spoken of as a senile, unproductive love of
existence; this cheerfulness is the counterpart of the splendid
"naïveté" of the earlier Greeks, which, according to the characteristic
indicated above, must be conceived as the blossom of the Apollonian
culture growing out of a dark abyss, as the victory which the Hellenic
will, through its mirroring of beauty, obtains over suffering and the
wisdom of suffering. The noblest manifestation of that other form of
"Greek cheerfulness," the Alexandrine, is the cheerfulness of the
_theoretical man_: it exhibits the same symptomatic characteristics as
I have just inferred concerning the spirit of the un-Dionysian:--it
combats Dionysian wisdom and art, it seeks to dissolve myth, it
substitutes for metaphysical comfort an earthly consonance, in fact, a
_deus ex machina_ of its own, namely the god of machines and crucibles,
that is, the powers of the genii of nature recognised and employed in
the service of higher egoism; it believes in amending the world by
knowledge, in guiding life by science, and that it can really confine
the individual within a narrow sphere of solvable problems, where he
cheerfully says to life: "I desire thee: it is worth while to know
thee."



18.


It is an eternal phenomenon: the avidious will can always, by means
of an illusion spread over things, detain its creatures in life
and compel them to live on. One is chained by the Socratic love of
knowledge and the vain hope of being able thereby to heal the eternal
wound of existence; another is ensnared by art's seductive veil of
beauty fluttering before his eyes; still another by the metaphysical
comfort that eternal life flows on indestructibly beneath the whirl of
phenomena: to say nothing of the more ordinary and almost more powerful
illusions which the will has always at hand. These three specimens of
illusion are on the whole designed only for the more nobly endowed
natures, who in general feel profoundly the weight and burden of
existence, and must be deluded into forgetfulness of their displeasure
by exquisite stimulants. All that we call culture is made up of these
stimulants; and, according to the proportion of the ingredients, we
have either a specially _Socratic_ or _artistic_ or _tragic culture_:
or, if historical exemplifications are wanted, there is either an
Alexandrine or a Hellenic or a Buddhistic culture.

Our whole modern world is entangled in the meshes of Alexandrine
culture, and recognises as its ideal the _theorist_ equipped with
the most potent means of knowledge, and labouring in the service of
science, of whom the archetype and progenitor is Socrates. All our
educational methods have originally this ideal in view: every other
form of existence must struggle onwards wearisomely beside it, as
something tolerated, but not intended. In an almost alarming manner the
cultured man was here found for a long time only in the form of the
scholar: even our poetical arts have been forced to evolve from learned
imitations, and in the main effect of the rhyme we still recognise the
origin of our poetic form from artistic experiments with a non-native
and thoroughly learned language. How unintelligible must _Faust,_ the
modern cultured man, who is in himself intelligible, have appeared to a
true Greek,--Faust, storming discontentedly through all the faculties,
devoted to magic and the devil from a desire for knowledge, whom we
have only to place alongside of Socrates for the purpose of comparison,
in order to see that modern man begins to divine the boundaries of
this Socratic love of perception and longs for a coast in the wide
waste of the ocean of knowledge. When Goethe on one occasion said to
Eckermann with reference to Napoleon: "Yes, my good friend, there is
also a productiveness of deeds," he reminded us in a charmingly naïve
manner that the non-theorist is something incredible and astounding to
modern man; so that the wisdom of Goethe is needed once more in order
to discover that such a surprising form of existence is comprehensible,
nay even pardonable.

Now, we must not hide from ourselves what is concealed in the heart
of this Socratic culture: Optimism, deeming itself absolute! Well, we
must not be alarmed if the fruits of this optimism ripen,--if society,
leavened to the very lowest strata by this kind of culture, gradually
begins to tremble through wanton agitations and desires, if the belief
in the earthly happiness of all, if the belief in the possibility of
such a general intellectual culture is gradually transformed into the
threatening demand for such an Alexandrine earthly happiness, into
the conjuring of a Euripidean _deus ex machina._ Let us mark this
well: the Alexandrine culture requires a slave class, to be able to
exist permanently: but, in its optimistic view of life, it denies the
necessity of such a class, and consequently, when the effect of its
beautifully seductive and tranquillising utterances about the "dignity
of man" and the "dignity of labour" is spent, it gradually drifts
towards a dreadful destination. There is nothing more terrible than
a barbaric slave class, who have learned to regard their existence
as an injustice, and now prepare to take vengeance, not only for
themselves, but for all generations. In the face of such threatening
storms, who dares to appeal with confident spirit to our pale and
exhausted religions, which even in their foundations have degenerated
into scholastic religions?--so that myth, the necessary prerequisite
of every religion, is already paralysed everywhere, and even in this
domain the optimistic spirit--which we have just designated as the
annihilating germ of society--has attained the mastery.

While the evil slumbering in the heart of theoretical culture gradually
begins to disquiet modern man, and makes him anxiously ransack the
stores of his experience for means to avert the danger, though not
believing very much in these means; while he, therefore, begins to
divine the consequences his position involves: great, universally
gifted natures have contrived, with an incredible amount of thought, to
make use of the apparatus of science itself, in order to point out the
limits and the relativity of knowledge generally, and thus definitely
to deny the claim of science to universal validity and universal ends:
with which demonstration the illusory notion was for the first time
recognised as such, which pretends, with the aid of causality, to be
able to fathom the innermost essence of things. The extraordinary
courage and wisdom of _Kant_ and _Schopenhauer_ have succeeded in
gaining the most, difficult, victory, the victory over the optimism
hidden in the essence of logic, which optimism in turn is the basis of
our culture. While this optimism, resting on apparently unobjectionable
_æterna veritates,_ believed in the intelligibility and solvability of
all the riddles of the world, and treated space, time, and causality
as totally unconditioned laws of the most universal validity, Kant, on
the other hand, showed that these served in reality only to elevate the
mere phenomenon, the work of Mâyâ, to the sole and highest reality,
putting it in place of the innermost and true essence of things, thus
making the actual knowledge of this essence impossible, that is,
according to the expression of Schopenhauer, to lull the dreamer still
more soundly asleep (_Welt als Wille und Vorstellung,_ I. 498). With
this knowledge a culture is inaugurated which I venture to designate as
a tragic culture; the most important characteristic of which is that
wisdom takes the place of science as the highest end,--wisdom, which,
uninfluenced by the seductive distractions of the sciences, turns
with unmoved eye to the comprehensive view of the world, and seeks to
apprehend therein the eternal suffering as its own with sympathetic
feelings of love. Let us imagine a rising generation with this
undauntedness of vision, with this heroic desire for the prodigious,
let us imagine the bold step of these dragon-slayers, the proud and
daring spirit with which they turn their backs on all the effeminate
doctrines of optimism in order "to live resolutely" in the Whole and in
the Full: would it not be necessary for the tragic man of this culture,
with his self-discipline to earnestness and terror, to desire a new
art, the art of metaphysical comfort,--namely, tragedy, as the Hellena
belonging to him, and that he should exclaim with Faust:

    Und sollt' ich nicht, sehnsüchtigster Gewalt,
    In's Leben ziehn die einzigste Gestalt?[21]

But now that the Socratic culture has been shaken from two directions,
and is only able to hold the sceptre of its infallibility with
trembling hands,--once by the fear of its own conclusions which it at
length begins to surmise, and again, because it is no longer convinced
with its former naïve trust of the eternal validity of its foundation,
--it is a sad spectacle to behold how the dance of its thought always
rushes longingly on new forms, to embrace them, and then, shuddering,
lets them go of a sudden, as Mephistopheles does the seductive Lamiæ.
It is certainly the symptom of the "breach" which all are wont to speak
of as the primordial suffering of modern culture that the theoretical
man, alarmed and dissatisfied at his own conclusions, no longer dares
to entrust himself to the terrible ice-stream of existence: he runs
timidly up and down the bank. He no longer wants to have anything
entire, with all the natural cruelty of things, so thoroughly has he
been spoiled by his optimistic contemplation. Besides, he feels that
a culture built up on the principles of science must perish when it
begins to grow _illogical,_ that is, to avoid its own conclusions.
Our art reveals this universal trouble: in vain does one seek help by
imitating all the great productive periods and natures, in vain does
one accumulate the entire "world-literature" around modern man for
his comfort, in vain does one place one's self in the midst of the
art-styles and artists of all ages, so that one may give names to them
as Adam did to the beasts: one still continues the eternal hungerer,
the "critic" without joy and energy, the Alexandrine man, who is in
the main a librarian and corrector of proofs, and who, pitiable wretch
goes blind from the dust of books and printers' errors.


[21] Cf. Introduction, p. 14.



19.


We cannot designate the intrinsic substance of Socratic culture more
distinctly than by calling it _the culture of the opera_: for it is in
this department that culture has expressed itself with special naïveté
concerning its aims and perceptions, which is sufficiently surprising
when we compare the genesis of the opera and the facts of operatic
development with the eternal truths of the Apollonian and Dionysian.
I call to mind first of all the origin of the _stilo rappresentativo_
and the recitative. Is it credible that this thoroughly externalised
operatic music, incapable of devotion, could be received and cherished
with enthusiastic favour, as a re-birth, as it were, of all true music,
by the very age in which the ineffably sublime and sacred music of
Palestrina had originated? And who, on the other hand, would think of
making only the diversion-craving luxuriousness of those Florentine
circles and the vanity of their dramatic singers responsible for the
love of the opera which spread with such rapidity? That in the same
age, even among the same people, this passion for a half-musical
mode of speech should awaken alongside of the vaulted structure
of Palestrine harmonies which the entire Christian Middle Age had
been building up, I can explain to myself only by a co-operating
_extra-artistic tendency_ in the essence of the recitative.

The listener, who insists on distinctly hearing the words under the
music, has his wishes met by the singer in that he speaks rather than
sings, and intensifies the pathetic expression of the words in this
half-song: by this intensification of the pathos he facilitates the
understanding of the words and surmounts the remaining half of the
music. The specific danger which now threatens him is that in some
unguarded moment he may give undue importance to music, which would
forthwith result in the destruction of the pathos of the speech and
the distinctness of the words: while, on the other hand, he always
feels himself impelled to musical delivery and to virtuose exhibition
of vocal talent. Here the "poet" comes to his aid, who knows how to
provide him with abundant opportunities for lyrical interjections,
repetitions of words and sentences, etc.,--at which places the singer,
now in the purely musical element, can rest himself without minding the
words. This alternation of emotionally impressive, yet only half-sung
speech and wholly sung interjections, which is characteristic of the
_stilo rappresentativo,_ this rapidly changing endeavour to operate
now on the conceptional and representative faculty of the hearer, now
on his musical sense, is something so thoroughly unnatural and withal
so intrinsically contradictory both to the Apollonian and Dionysian
artistic impulses, that one has to infer an origin of the recitative
foreign to all artistic instincts. The recitative must be defined,
according to this description, as the combination of epic and lyric
delivery, not indeed as an intrinsically stable combination which
could not be attained in the case of such totally disparate elements,
but an entirely superficial mosaic conglutination, such as is totally
unprecedented in the domain of nature and experience. _But this was
not the opinion of the inventors of the recitative:_ they themselves,
and their age with them, believed rather that the mystery of antique
music had been solved by this _stilo rappresentativo,_ in which, as
they thought, the only explanation of the enormous influence of an
Orpheus, an Amphion, and even of Greek tragedy was to be found. The new
style was regarded by them as the re-awakening of the most effective
music, the Old Greek music: indeed, with the universal and popular
conception of the Homeric world _as the primitive world,_ they could
abandon themselves to the dream of having descended once more into the
paradisiac beginnings of mankind, wherein music also must needs have
had the unsurpassed purity, power, and innocence of which the poets
could give such touching accounts in their pastoral plays. Here we see
into the internal process of development of this thoroughly modern
variety of art, the opera: a powerful need here acquires an art, but
it is a need of an unæsthetic kind: the yearning for the idyll, the
belief in the prehistoric existence of the artistic, good man. The
recitative was regarded as the rediscovered language of this primitive
man; the opera as the recovered land of this idyllically or heroically
good creature, who in every action follows at the same time a natural
artistic impulse, who sings a little along with all he has to say, in
order to sing immediately with full voice on the slightest emotional
excitement. It is now a matter of indifference to us that the humanists
of those days combated the old ecclesiastical representation of man
as naturally corrupt and lost, with this new-created picture of the
paradisiac artist: so that opera may be understood as the oppositional
dogma of the good man, whereby however a solace was at the same time
found for the pessimism to which precisely the seriously-disposed
men of that time were most strongly incited, owing to the frightful
uncertainty of all conditions of life. It is enough to have perceived
that the intrinsic charm, and therefore the genesis, of this new form
of art lies in the gratification of an altogether unæsthetic need, in
the optimistic glorification of man as such, in the conception of the
primitive man as the man naturally good and artistic: a principle of
the opera which has gradually changed into a threatening and terrible
_demand,_ which, in face of the socialistic movements of the present
time, we can no longer ignore. The "good primitive man" wants his
rights: what paradisiac prospects!

I here place by way of parallel still another equally obvious
confirmation of my view that opera is built up on the same principles
as our Alexandrine culture. Opera is the birth of the theoretical man,
of the critical layman, not of the artist: one of the most surprising
facts in the whole history of art. It was the demand of thoroughly
unmusical hearers that the words must above all be understood, so
that according to them a re-birth of music is only to be expected
when some mode of singing has been discovered in which the text-word
lords over the counterpoint as the master over the servant. For the
words, it is argued, are as much nobler than the accompanying harmonic
system as the soul is nobler than the body. It was in accordance with
the laically unmusical crudeness of these views that the combination
of music, picture and expression was effected in the beginnings of
the opera: in the spirit of this æsthetics the first experiments
were also made in the leading laic circles of Florence by the poets
and singers patronised there. The man incapable of art creates for
himself a species of art precisely because he is the inartistic man
as such. Because he does not divine the Dionysian depth of music, he
changes his musical taste into appreciation of the understandable
word-and-tone-rhetoric of the passions in the _stilo rappresentativo,_
and into the voluptuousness of the arts of song; because he is unable
to behold a vision, he forces the machinist and the decorative artist
into his service; because he cannot apprehend the true nature of the
artist, he conjures up the "artistic primitive man" to suit his taste,
that is, the man who sings and recites verses under the influence
of passion. He dreams himself into a time when passion suffices to
generate songs and poems: as if emotion had ever been able to create
anything artistic. The postulate of the opera is a false belief
concerning the artistic process, in fact, the idyllic belief that every
sentient man is an artist. In the sense of this belief, opera is the
expression of the taste of the laity in art, who dictate their laws
with the cheerful optimism of the theorist.

Should we desire to unite in one the two conceptions just set forth
as influential in the origin of opera, it would only remain for us to
speak of an _idyllic tendency of the opera_: in which connection we
may avail ourselves exclusively of the phraseology and illustration of
Schiller.[22] "Nature and the ideal," he says, "are either objects of
grief, when the former is represented as lost, the latter unattained;
or both are objects of joy, in that they are represented as real.
The first case furnishes the elegy in its narrower signification,
the second the idyll in its widest sense." Here we must at once call
attention to the common characteristic of these two conceptions in
operatic genesis, namely, that in them the ideal is not regarded as
unattained or nature as lost Agreeably to this sentiment, there was
a primitive age of man when he lay close to the heart of nature,
and, owing to this naturalness, had attained the ideal of mankind in
a paradisiac goodness and artist-organisation: from which perfect
primitive man all of us were supposed to be descended; whose faithful
copy we were in fact still said to be: only we had to cast off some
few things in order to recognise ourselves once more as this primitive
man, on the strength of a voluntary renunciation of superfluous
learnedness, of super-abundant culture. It was to such a concord of
nature and the ideal, to an idyllic reality, that the cultured man
of the Renaissance suffered himself to be led back by his operatic
imitation of Greek tragedy; he made use of this tragedy, as Dante made
use of Vergil, in order to be led up to the gates of paradise: while
from this point he went on without assistance and passed over from an
imitation of the highest form of Greek art to a "restoration of all
things," to an imitation of man's original art-world. What delightfully
naïve hopefulness of these daring endeavours, in the very heart of
theoretical culture!--solely to be explained by the comforting belief,
that "man-in-himself" is the eternally virtuous hero of the opera,
the eternally fluting or singing shepherd, who must always in the end
rediscover himself as such, if he has at any time really lost himself;
solely the fruit of the optimism, which here rises like a sweetishly
seductive column of vapour out of the depth of the Socratic conception
of the world.

The features of the opera therefore do not by any means exhibit the
elegiac sorrow of an eternal loss, but rather the cheerfulness of
eternal rediscovery, the indolent delight in an idyllic reality which
one can at least represent to one's self each moment as real: and in
so doing one will perhaps surmise some day that this supposed reality
is nothing but a fantastically silly dawdling, concerning which every
one, who could judge it by the terrible earnestness of true nature
and compare it with the actual primitive scenes of the beginnings of
mankind, would have to call out with loathing: Away with the phantom!
Nevertheless one would err if one thought it possible to frighten
away merely by a vigorous shout such a dawdling thing as the opera,
as if it were a spectre. He who would destroy the opera must join
issue with Alexandrine cheerfulness, which expresses itself so naïvely
therein concerning its favourite representation; of which in fact
it is the specific form of art. But what is to be expected for art
itself from the operation of a form of art, the beginnings of which
do not at all lie in the æsthetic province; which has rather stolen
over from a half-moral sphere into the artistic domain, and has been
able only now and then to delude us concerning this hybrid origin? By
what sap is this parasitic opera-concern nourished, if not by that
of true art? Must we not suppose that the highest and indeed the
truly serious task of art--to free the eye from its glance into the
horrors of night and to deliver the "subject" by the healing balm of
appearance from the spasms of volitional agitations--will degenerate
under the influence of its idyllic seductions and Alexandrine
adulation to an empty dissipating tendency, to pastime? What will
become of the eternal truths of the Dionysian and Apollonian in such
an amalgamation of styles as I have exhibited in the character of the
_stilo rappresentativo_? where music is regarded as the servant, the
text as the master, where music is compared with the body, the text
with the soul? where at best the highest aim will be the realisation
of a paraphrastic tone-painting, just as formerly in the New Attic
Dithyramb? where music is completely alienated from its true dignity
of being, the Dionysian mirror of the world, so that the only thing
left to it is, as a slave of phenomena, to imitate the formal character
thereof, and to excite an external pleasure in the play of lines and
proportions. On close observation, this fatal influence of the opera
on music is seen to coincide absolutely with the universal development
of modern music; the optimism lurking in the genesis of the opera and
in the essence of culture represented thereby, has, with alarming
rapidity, succeeded in divesting music of its Dionyso-cosmic mission
and in impressing on it a playfully formal and pleasurable character: a
change with which perhaps only the metamorphosis of the Æschylean man
into the cheerful Alexandrine man could be compared.

If, however, in the exemplification herewith indicated we have rightly
associated the evanescence of the Dionysian spirit with a most
striking, but hitherto unexplained transformation and degeneration of
the Hellene--what hopes must revive in us when the most trustworthy
auspices guarantee _the reverse process, the gradual awakening of
the Dionysian spirit_ in our modern world! It is impossible for the
divine strength of Herakles to languish for ever in voluptuous bondage
to Omphale. Out of the Dionysian root of the German spirit a power
has arisen which has nothing in common with the primitive conditions
of Socratic culture, and can neither be explained nor excused
thereby, but is rather regarded by this culture as something terribly
inexplicable and overwhelmingly hostile,--namely, _German music_ as
we have to understand it, especially in its vast solar orbit from
Bach to Beethoven, from Beethoven to Wagner. What even under the most
favourable circumstances can the knowledge-craving Socratism of our
days do with this demon rising from unfathomable depths? Neither by
means of the zig-zag and arabesque work of operatic melody, nor with
the aid of the arithmetical counting board of fugue and contrapuntal
dialectics is the formula to be found, in the trebly powerful light[23]
of which one could subdue this demon and compel it to speak. What
a spectacle, when our æsthetes, with a net of "beauty" peculiar to
themselves, now pursue and clutch at the genius of music romping
about before them with incomprehensible life, and in so doing display
activities which are not to be judged by the standard of eternal beauty
any more than by the standard of the sublime. Let us but observe these
patrons of music as they are, at close range, when they call out so
indefatigably "beauty! beauty!" to discover whether they have the marks
of nature's darling children who are fostered and fondled in the lap
of the beautiful, or whether they do not rather seek a disguise for
their own rudeness, an æsthetical pretext for their own unemotional
insipidity: I am thinking here, for instance, of Otto Jahn. But let the
liar and the hypocrite beware of our German music: for in the midst
of all our culture it is really the only genuine, pure and purifying
fire-spirit from which and towards which, as in the teaching of the
great Heraclitus of Ephesus, all things move in a double orbit-all
that we now call culture, education, civilisation, must appear some day
before the unerring judge, Dionysus.

Let us recollect furthermore how Kant and Schopenhauer made it
possible for the spirit of _German philosophy_ streaming from the
same sources to annihilate the satisfied delight in existence of
scientific Socratism by the delimitation of the boundaries thereof; how
through this delimitation an infinitely profounder and more serious
view of ethical problems and of art was inaugurated, which we may
unhesitatingly designate as _Dionysian_ wisdom comprised in concepts.
To what then does the mystery of this oneness of German music and
philosophy point, if not to a new form of existence, concerning the
substance of which we can only inform ourselves presentiently from
Hellenic analogies? For to us who stand on the boundary line between
two different forms of existence, the Hellenic prototype retains the
immeasurable value, that therein all these transitions and struggles
are imprinted in a classically instructive form: except that we, as
it were, experience analogically in _reverse_ order the chief epochs
of the Hellenic genius, and seem now, for instance, to pass backwards
from the Alexandrine age to the period of tragedy. At the same time
we have the feeling that the birth of a tragic age betokens only a
return to itself of the German spirit, a blessed self-rediscovering
after excessive and urgent external influences have for a long time
compelled it, living as it did in helpless barbaric formlessness, to
servitude under their form. It may at last, after returning to the
primitive source of its being, venture to stalk along boldly and freely
before all nations without hugging the leading-strings of a Romanic
civilisation: if only it can learn implicitly of one people--the
Greeks, of whom to learn at all is itself a high honour and a rare
distinction. And when did we require these highest of all teachers more
than at present, when we experience _a re-birth of tragedy_ and are in
danger alike of not knowing whence it comes, and of being unable to
make clear to ourselves whither it tends.


[22] Essay on Elegiac Poetry.--TR.

[23] See _Faust,_ Part 1.1. 965--TR.



20.


It may be weighed some day before an impartial judge, in what time and
in what men the German spirit has thus far striven most resolutely to
learn of the Greeks: and if we confidently assume that this unique
praise must be accorded to the noblest intellectual efforts of Goethe,
Schiller, and Winkelmann, it will certainly have to be added that
since their time, and subsequently to the more immediate influences of
these efforts, the endeavour to attain to culture and to the Greeks by
this path has in an incomprehensible manner grown feebler and feebler.
In order not to despair altogether of the German spirit, must we not
infer therefrom that possibly, in some essential matter, even these
champions could not penetrate into the core of the Hellenic nature,
and were unable to establish a permanent friendly alliance between
German and Greek culture? So that perhaps an unconscious perception
of this shortcoming might raise also in more serious minds the
disheartening doubt as to whether after such predecessors they could
advance still farther on this path of culture, or could reach the goal
at all. Accordingly, we see the opinions concerning the value of Greek
contribution to culture degenerate since that time in the most alarming
manner; the expression of compassionate superiority may be heard
in the most heterogeneous intellectual and non-intellectual camps,
and elsewhere a totally ineffective declamation dallies with "Greek
harmony," "Greek beauty," "Greek cheerfulness." And in the very circles
whose dignity it might be to draw indefatigably from the Greek channel
for the good of German culture, in the circles of the teachers in the
higher educational institutions, they have learned best to compromise
with the Greeks in good time and on easy terms, to the extent often of
a sceptical abandonment of the Hellenic ideal and a total perversion of
the true purpose of antiquarian studies. If there be any one at all in
these circles who has not completely exhausted himself in the endeavour
to be a trustworthy corrector of old texts or a natural-history
microscopist of language, he perhaps seeks also to appropriate Grecian
antiquity "historically" along with other antiquities, and in any case
according to the method and with the supercilious air of our present
cultured historiography. When, therefore, the intrinsic efficiency
of the higher educational institutions has never perhaps been lower
or feebler than at present, when the "journalist," the paper slave
of the day, has triumphed over the academic teacher in all matters
pertaining to culture, and there only remains to the latter the often
previously experienced metamorphosis of now fluttering also, as a
cheerful cultured butterfly, in the idiom of the journalist, with the
"light elegance" peculiar thereto--with what painful confusion must the
cultured persons of a period like the present gaze at the phenomenon
(which can perhaps be comprehended analogically only by means of the
profoundest principle of the hitherto unintelligible Hellenic genius)
of the reawakening of the Dionysian spirit and the re-birth of tragedy?
Never has there been another art-period in which so-called culture
and true art have been so estranged and opposed, as is so obviously
the case at present. We understand why so feeble a culture hates true
art; it fears destruction thereby. But must not an entire domain of
culture, namely the Socratic-Alexandrine, have exhausted its powers
after contriving to culminate in such a daintily-tapering point as our
present culture? When it was not permitted to heroes like Goethe and
Schiller to break open the enchanted gate which leads into the Hellenic
magic mountain, when with their most dauntless striving they did not
get beyond the longing gaze which the Goethean Iphigenia cast from
barbaric Tauris to her home across the ocean, what could the epigones
of such heroes hope for, if the gate should not open to them suddenly
of its own accord, in an entirely different position, quite overlooked
in all endeavours of culture hitherto--amidst the mystic tones of
reawakened tragic music.

Let no one attempt to weaken our faith in an impending re-birth of
Hellenic antiquity; for in it alone we find our hope of a renovation
and purification of the German spirit through the fire-magic of music.
What else do we know of amidst the present desolation and languor
of culture, which could awaken any comforting expectation for the
future? We look in vain for one single vigorously-branching root, for
a speck of fertile and healthy soil: there is dust, sand, torpidness
and languishing everywhere! Under such circumstances a cheerless
solitary wanderer could choose for himself no better symbol than the
Knight with Death and the Devil, as Dürer has sketched him for us, the
mail-clad knight, grim and stern of visage, who is able, unperturbed
by his gruesome companions, and yet hopelessly, to pursue his terrible
path with horse and hound alone. Our Schopenhauer was such a Dürerian
knight: he was destitute of all hope, but he sought the truth. There is
not his equal.

But how suddenly this gloomily depicted wilderness of our exhausted
culture changes when the Dionysian magic touches it! A hurricane
seizes everything decrepit, decaying, collapsed, and stunted; wraps
it whirlingly into a red cloud of dust; and carries it like a vulture
into the air. Confused thereby, our glances seek for what has vanished:
for what they see is something risen to the golden light as from
a depression, so full and green, so luxuriantly alive, so ardently
infinite. Tragedy sits in the midst of this exuberance of life,
sorrow and joy, in sublime ecstasy; she listens to a distant doleful
song--it tells of the Mothers of Being, whose names are: _Wahn, Wille,
Wehe_[21]--Yes, my friends, believe with me in Dionysian life and
in the re-birth of tragedy. The time of the Socratic man is past:
crown yourselves with ivy, take in your hands the thyrsus, and do not
marvel if tigers and panthers lie down fawning at your feet. Dare now
to be tragic men, for ye are to be redeemed! Ye are to accompany the
Dionysian festive procession from India to Greece! Equip yourselves for
severe conflict, but believe in the wonders of your god!



21.


Gliding back from these hortative tones into the mood which befits
the contemplative man, I repeat that it can only be learnt from the
Greeks what such a sudden and miraculous awakening of tragedy must
signify for the essential basis of a people's life. It is the people
of the tragic mysteries who fight the battles with the Persians: and
again, the people who waged such wars required tragedy as a necessary
healing potion. Who would have imagined that there was still such a
uniformly powerful effusion of the simplest political sentiments, the
most natural domestic instincts and the primitive manly delight in
strife in this very people after it had been shaken to its foundations
for several generations by the most violent convulsions of the
Dionysian demon? If at every considerable spreading of the Dionysian
commotion one always perceives that the Dionysian loosing from the
shackles of the individual makes itself felt first of all in an
increased encroachment on the political instincts, to the extent of
indifference, yea even hostility, it is certain, on the other hand,
that the state-forming Apollo is also the genius of the _principium
individuationis,_ and that the state and domestic sentiment cannot live
without an assertion of individual personality. There is only one way
from orgasm for a people,--the way to Indian Buddhism, which, in order
to be at all endured with its longing for nothingness, requires the
rare ecstatic states with their elevation above space, time, and the
individual; just as these in turn demand a philosophy which teaches how
to overcome the indescribable depression of the intermediate states by
means of a fancy. With the same necessity, owing to the unconditional
dominance of political impulses, a people drifts into a path of
extremest secularisation, the most magnificent, but also the most
terrible expression of which is the Roman _imperium_.

Placed between India and Rome, and constrained to a seductive choice,
the Greeks succeeded in devising in classical purity still a third form
of life, not indeed for long private use, but just on that account for
immortality. For it holds true in all things that those whom the gods
love die young, but, on the other hand, it holds equally true that they
then live eternally with the gods. One must not demand of what is most
noble that it should possess the durable toughness of leather; the
staunch durability, which, for instance, was inherent in the national
character of the Romans, does not probably belong to the indispensable
predicates of perfection. But if we ask by what physic it was possible
for the Greeks, in their best period, notwithstanding the extraordinary
strength of their Dionysian and political impulses, neither to exhaust
themselves by ecstatic brooding, nor by a consuming scramble for empire
and worldly honour, but to attain the splendid mixture which we find
in a noble, inflaming, and contemplatively disposing wine, we must
remember the enormous power of _tragedy,_ exciting, purifying, and
disburdening the entire life of a people; the highest value of which
we shall divine only when, as in the case of the Greeks, it appears
to us as the essence of all the prophylactic healing forces, as the
mediator arbitrating between the strongest and most inherently fateful
characteristics of a people.

Tragedy absorbs the highest musical orgasm into itself, so that it
absolutely brings music to perfection among the Greeks, as among
ourselves; but it then places alongside thereof tragic myth and the
tragic hero, who, like a mighty Titan, takes the entire Dionysian world
on his shoulders and disburdens us thereof; while, on the other hand,
it is able by means of this same tragic myth, in the person of the
tragic hero, to deliver us from the intense longing for this existence,
and reminds us with warning hand of another existence and a higher
joy, for which the struggling hero prepares himself presentiently by
his destruction, not by his victories. Tragedy sets a sublime symbol,
namely the myth between the universal authority of its music and the
receptive Dionysian hearer, and produces in him the illusion that music
is only the most effective means for the animation of the plastic world
of myth. Relying upon this noble illusion, she can now move her limbs
for the dithyrambic dance, and abandon herself unhesitatingly to an
orgiastic feeling of freedom, in which she could not venture to indulge
as music itself, without this illusion. The myth protects us from the
music, while, on the other hand, it alone gives the highest freedom
thereto. By way of return for this service, music imparts to tragic
myth such an impressive and convincing metaphysical significance as
could never be attained by word and image, without this unique aid;
and the tragic spectator in particular experiences thereby the sure
presentiment of supreme joy to which the path through destruction and
negation leads; so that he thinks he hears, as it were, the innermost
abyss of things speaking audibly to him.

If in these last propositions I have succeeded in giving perhaps only a
preliminary expression, intelligible to few at first, to this difficult
representation, I must not here desist from stimulating my friends to a
further attempt, or cease from beseeching them to prepare themselves,
by a detached example of our common experience, for the perception of
the universal proposition. In this example I must not appeal to those
who make use of the pictures of the scenic processes, the words and the
emotions of the performers, in order to approximate thereby to musical
perception; for none of these speak music as their mother-tongue,
and, in spite of the aids in question, do not get farther than the
precincts of musical perception, without ever being allowed to touch
its innermost shrines; some of them, like Gervinus, do not even reach
the precincts by this path. I have only to address myself to those
who, being immediately allied to music, have it as it were for their
mother's lap, and are connected with things almost exclusively by
unconscious musical relations. I ask the question of these genuine
musicians: whether they can imagine a man capable of hearing the third
act of _Tristan und Isolde_ without any aid of word or scenery, purely
as a vast symphonic period, without expiring by a spasmodic distention
of all the wings of the soul? A man who has thus, so to speak, put his
ear to the heart-chamber of the cosmic will, who feels the furious
desire for existence issuing therefrom as a thundering stream or most
gently dispersed brook, into all the veins of the world, would he not
collapse all at once? Could he endure, in the wretched fragile tenement
of the human individual, to hear the re-echo of countless cries of
joy and sorrow from the "vast void of cosmic night," without flying
irresistibly towards his primitive home at the sound of this pastoral
dance-song of metaphysics? But if, nevertheless, such a work can be
heard as a whole, without a renunciation of individual existence, if
such a creation could be created without demolishing its creator--where
are we to get the solution of this contradiction?

Here there interpose between our highest musical excitement and the
music in question the tragic myth and the tragic hero--in reality only
as symbols of the most universal facts, of which music alone can speak
directly. If, however, we felt as purely Dionysian beings, myth as a
symbol would stand by us absolutely ineffective and unnoticed, and
would never for a moment prevent us from giving ear to the re-echo of
the _universalia ante rem._ Here, however, the _Apollonian_ power, with
a view to the restoration of the well-nigh shattered individual, bursts
forth with the healing balm of a blissful illusion: all of a sudden
we imagine we see only Tristan, motionless, with hushed voice saying
to himself: "the old tune, why does it wake me?" And what formerly
interested us like a hollow sigh from the heart of being, seems now
only to tell us how "waste and void is the sea." And when, breathless,
we thought to expire by a convulsive distention of all our feelings,
and only a slender tie bound us to our present existence, we now hear
and see only the hero wounded to death and still not dying, with his
despairing cry: "Longing! Longing! In dying still longing! for longing
not dying!" And if formerly, after such a surplus and superabundance of
consuming agonies, the jubilation of the born rent our hearts almost
like the very acme of agony, the rejoicing Kurwenal now stands between
us and the "jubilation as such," with face turned toward the ship which
carries Isolde. However powerfully fellow-suffering encroaches upon us,
it nevertheless delivers us in a manner from the primordial suffering
of the world, just as the symbol-image of the myth delivers us from the
immediate perception of the highest cosmic idea, just as the thought
and word deliver us from the unchecked effusion of the unconscious
will. The glorious Apollonian illusion makes it appear as if the very
realm of tones presented itself to us as a plastic cosmos, as if even
the fate of Tristan and Isolde had been merely formed and moulded
therein as out of some most delicate and impressible material.

Thus does the Apollonian wrest us from Dionysian universality and fill
us with rapture for individuals; to these it rivets our sympathetic
emotion, through these it satisfies the sense of beauty which longs for
great and sublime forms; it brings before us biographical portraits,
and incites us to a thoughtful apprehension of the essence of life
contained therein. With the immense potency of the image, the concept,
the ethical teaching and the sympathetic emotion--the Apollonian
influence uplifts man from his orgiastic self-annihilation, and
beguiles him concerning the universality of the Dionysian process
into the belief that he is seeing a detached picture of the world,
for instance, Tristan and Isolde, and that, _through music,_ he will
be enabled to _see_ it still more clearly and intrinsically. What can
the healing magic of Apollo not accomplish when it can even excite in
us the illusion that the Dionysian is actually in the service of the
Apollonian, the effects of which it is capable of enhancing; yea, that
music is essentially the representative art for an Apollonian substance?

With the pre-established harmony which obtains between perfect drama
and its music, the drama attains the highest degree of conspicuousness,
such as is usually unattainable in mere spoken drama. As all the
animated figures of the scene in the independently evolved lines
of melody simplify themselves before us to the distinctness of the
catenary curve, the coexistence of these lines is also audible in the
harmonic change which sympathises in a most delicate manner with the
evolved process: through which change the relations of things become
immediately perceptible to us in a sensible and not at all abstract
manner, as we likewise perceive thereby that it is only in these
relations that the essence of a character and of a line of melody
manifests itself clearly. And while music thus compels us to see more
extensively and more intrinsically than usual, and makes us spread out
the curtain of the scene before ourselves like some delicate texture,
the world of the stage is as infinitely expanded for our spiritualised,
introspective eye as it is illumined outwardly from within. How can
the word-poet furnish anything analogous, who strives to attain this
internal expansion and illumination of the visible stage-world by a
much more imperfect mechanism and an indirect path, proceeding as he
does from word and concept? Albeit musical tragedy likewise avails
itself of the word, it is at the same time able to place alongside
thereof its basis and source, and can make the unfolding of the word,
from within outwards, obvious to us.

Of the process just set forth, however, it could still be said
as decidedly that it is only a glorious appearance, namely the
afore-mentioned Apollonian _illusion,_ through the influence of which
we are to be delivered from the Dionysian obtrusion and excess.
In point of fact, the relation of music to drama is precisely the
reverse; music is the adequate idea of the world, drama is but the
reflex of this idea, a detached umbrage thereof. The identity between
the line of melody and the lining form, between the harmony and the
character-relations of this form, is true in a sense antithetical to
what one would suppose on the contemplation of musical tragedy. We
may agitate and enliven the form in the most conspicuous manner, and
enlighten it from within, but it still continues merely phenomenon,
from which there is no bridge to lead us into the true reality, into
the heart of the world. Music, however, speaks out of this heart; and
though countless phenomena of the kind might be passing manifestations
of this music, they could never exhaust its essence, but would always
be merely its externalised copies. Of course, as regards the intricate
relation of music and drama, nothing can be explained, while all may
be confused by the popular and thoroughly false antithesis of soul and
body; but the unphilosophical crudeness of this antithesis seems to
have become--who knows for what reasons--a readily accepted Article of
Faith with our æstheticians, while they have learned nothing concerning
an antithesis of phenomenon and thing-in-itself, or perhaps, for
reasons equally unknown, have not cared to learn anything thereof.

Should it have been established by our analysis that the Apollonian
element in tragedy has by means of its illusion gained a complete
victory over the Dionysian primordial element of music, and has made
music itself subservient to its end, namely, the highest and clearest
elucidation of the drama, it would certainly be necessary to add the
very important restriction: that at the most essential point this
Apollonian illusion is dissolved and annihilated. The drama, which, by
the aid of music, spreads out before us with such inwardly illumined
distinctness in all its movements and figures, that we imagine we
see the texture unfolding on the loom as the shuttle flies to and
fro,--attains as a whole an effect which _transcends all Apollonian
artistic effects._ In the collective effect of tragedy, the Dionysian
gets the upper hand once more; tragedy ends with a sound which could
never emanate from the realm of Apollonian art. And the Apollonian
illusion is thereby found to be what it is,--the assiduous veiling
during the performance of tragedy of the intrinsically Dionysian
effect: which, however, is so powerful, that it finally forces
the Apollonian drama itself into a sphere where it begins to talk
with Dionysian wisdom, and even denies itself and its Apollonian
conspicuousness. Thus then the intricate relation of the Apollonian and
the Dionysian in tragedy must really be symbolised by a fraternal union
of the two deities: Dionysus speaks the language of Apollo; Apollo,
however, finally speaks the language of Dionysus; and so the highest
goal of tragedy and of art in general is attained.



22.


Let the attentive friend picture to himself purely and simply,
according to his experiences, the effect of a true musical tragedy. I
think I have so portrayed the phenomenon of this effect in both its
phases that he will now be able to interpret his own experiences. For
he will recollect that with regard to the myth which passed before
him he felt himself exalted to a kind of omniscience, as if his
visual faculty were no longer merely a surface faculty, but capable
of penetrating into the interior, and as if he now saw before him,
with the aid of music, the ebullitions of the will, the conflict of
motives, and the swelling stream of the passions, almost sensibly
visible, like a plenitude of actively moving lines and figures, and
could thereby dip into the most tender secrets of unconscious emotions.
While he thus becomes conscious of the highest exaltation of his
instincts for conspicuousness and transfiguration, he nevertheless
feels with equal definitiveness that this long series of Apollonian
artistic effects still does _not_ generate the blissful continuance in
will-less contemplation which the plasticist and the epic poet, that
is to say, the strictly Apollonian artists, produce in him by their
artistic productions: to wit, the justification of the world of the
_individuatio_ attained in this contemplation,--which is the object
and essence of Apollonian art. He beholds the transfigured world of
the stage and nevertheless denies it. He sees before him the tragic
hero in epic clearness and beauty, and nevertheless delights in his
annihilation. He comprehends the incidents of the scene in all their
details, and yet loves to flee into the incomprehensible. He feels the
actions of the hero to be justified, and is nevertheless still more
elated when these actions annihilate their originator. He shudders at
the sufferings which will befall the hero, and yet anticipates therein
a higher and much more overpowering joy. He sees more extensively and
profoundly than ever, and yet wishes to be blind. Whence must we derive
this curious internal dissension, this collapse of the Apollonian apex,
if not from the _Dionysian_ spell, which, though apparently stimulating
the Apollonian emotions to their highest pitch, can nevertheless force
this superabundance of Apollonian power into its service? _Tragic
myth_ is to be understood only as a symbolisation of Dionysian wisdom
by means of the expedients of Apollonian art: the mythus conducts the
world of phenomena to its boundaries, where it denies itself, and seeks
to flee back again into the bosom of the true and only reality; where
it then, like Isolde, seems to strike up its metaphysical swan-song:--

    In des Wonnemeeres
    wogendem Schwall,
    in der Duft-Wellen
    tönendem Schall,
    in des Weltathems
    wehendem All--
    ertrinken--versinken
    unbewusst--höchste Lust![24]

We thus realise to ourselves in the experiences of the truly æsthetic
hearer the tragic artist himself when he proceeds like a luxuriously
fertile divinity of individuation to create his figures (in which sense
his work can hardly be understood as an "imitation of nature")--and
when, on the other hand, his vast Dionysian impulse then absorbs the
entire world of phenomena, in order to anticipate beyond it, and
through its annihilation, the highest artistic primal joy, in the bosom
of the Primordial Unity. Of course, our æsthetes have nothing to say
about this return in fraternal union of the two art-deities to the
original home, nor of either the Apollonian or Dionysian excitement
of the hearer, while they are indefatigable in characterising the
struggle of the hero with fate, the triumph of the moral order of the
world, or the disburdenment of the emotions through tragedy, as the
properly Tragic: an indefatigableness which makes me think that they
are perhaps not æsthetically excitable men at all, but only to be
regarded as moral beings when hearing tragedy. Never since Aristotle
has an explanation of the tragic effect been proposed, by which an
æsthetic activity of the hearer could be inferred from artistic
circumstances. At one time fear and pity are supposed to be forced to
an alleviating discharge through the serious procedure, at another time
we are expected to feel elevated and inspired at the triumph of good
and noble principles, at the sacrifice of the hero in the interest of
a moral conception of things; and however certainly I believe that for
countless men precisely this, and only this, is the effect of tragedy,
it as obviously follows therefrom that all these, together with their
interpreting æsthetes, have had no experience of tragedy as the highest
_art._ The pathological discharge, the catharsis of Aristotle, which
philologists are at a loss whether to include under medicinal or moral
phenomena, recalls a remarkable anticipation of Goethe. "Without a
lively pathological interest," he says, "I too have never yet succeeded
in elaborating a tragic situation of any kind, and hence I have rather
avoided than sought it. Can it perhaps have been still another of the
merits of the ancients that the deepest pathos was with them merely
æsthetic play, whereas with us the truth of nature must co-operate in
order to produce such a work?" We can now answer in the affirmative
this latter profound question after our glorious experiences, in which
we have found to our astonishment in the case of musical tragedy
itself, that the deepest pathos can in reality be merely æsthetic play:
and therefore we are justified in believing that now for the first time
the proto-phenomenon of the tragic can be portrayed with some degree
of success. He who now will still persist in talking only of those
vicarious effects proceeding from ultra-æsthetic spheres, and does not
feel himself raised above the pathologically-moral process, may be left
to despair of his æsthetic nature: for which we recommend to him, by
way of innocent equivalent, the interpretation of Shakespeare after the
fashion of Gervinus, and the diligent search for poetic justice.

Thus with the re-birth of tragedy the _æsthetic hearer_ is also
born anew, in whose place in the theatre a curious _quid pro quo_
was wont to sit with half-moral and half-learned pretensions,--the
"critic." In his sphere hitherto everything has been artificial and
merely glossed over with a semblance of life. The performing artist
was in fact at a loss what to do with such a critically comporting
hearer, and hence he, as well as the dramatist or operatic composer
who inspired him, searched anxiously for the last remains of life
in a being so pretentiously barren and incapable of enjoyment. Such
"critics," however, have hitherto constituted the public; the student,
the school-boy, yea, even the most harmless womanly creature, were
already unwittingly prepared by education and by journals for a similar
perception of works of art. The nobler natures among the artists
counted upon exciting the moral-religious forces in such a public,
and the appeal to a moral order of the world operated vicariously,
when in reality some powerful artistic spell should have enraptured
the true hearer. Or again, some imposing or at all events exciting
tendency of the contemporary political and social world was presented
by the dramatist with such vividness that the hearer could forget his
critical exhaustion and abandon himself to similar emotions, as, in
patriotic or warlike moments, before the tribune of parliament, or
at the condemnation of crime and vice:--an estrangement of the true
aims of art which could not but lead directly now and then to a cult
of tendency. But here there took place what has always taken place
in the case of factitious arts, an extraordinary rapid depravation
of these tendencies, so that for instance the tendency to employ the
theatre as a means for the moral education of the people, which in
Schiller's time was taken seriously, is already reckoned among the
incredible antiquities of a surmounted culture. While the critic got
the upper hand in the theatre and concert-hall, the journalist in the
school, and the press in society, art degenerated into a topic of
conversation of the most trivial kind, and æsthetic criticism was used
as the cement of a vain, distracted, selfish and moreover piteously
unoriginal sociality, the significance of which is suggested by the
Schopenhauerian parable of the porcupines, so that there has never
been so much gossip about art and so little esteem for it. But is it
still possible to have intercourse with a man capable of conversing on
Beethoven or Shakespeare? Let each answer this question according to
his sentiments: he will at any rate show by his answer his conception
of "culture," provided he tries at least to answer the question, and
has not already grown mute with astonishment.

On the other hand, many a one more nobly and delicately endowed by
nature, though he may have gradually become a critical barbarian
in the manner described, could tell of the unexpected as well as
totally unintelligible effect which a successful performance of
_Lohengrin,_ for example, exerted on him: except that perhaps every
warning and interpreting hand was lacking to guide him; so that the
incomprehensibly heterogeneous and altogether incomparable sensation
which then affected him also remained isolated and became extinct, like
a mysterious star after a brief brilliancy. He then divined what the
æsthetic hearer is.


[24]

    In the sea of pleasure's
    Billowing roll,
    In the ether-waves
    Knelling and toll,
    In the world-breath's
    Wavering whole--
    To drown in, go down in--
    Lost in swoon--greatest boon!



23.


He who wishes to test himself rigorously as to how he is related to the
true æsthetic hearer, or whether he belongs rather to the community
of the Socrato-critical man, has only to enquire sincerely concerning
the sentiment with which he accepts the _wonder_ represented on the
stage: whether he feels his historical sense, which insists on strict
psychological causality, insulted by it, whether with benevolent
concession he as it were admits the wonder as a phenomenon intelligible
to childhood, but relinquished by him, or whether he experiences
anything else thereby. For he will thus be enabled to determine how
far he is on the whole capable of understanding _myth,_ that is to
say, the concentrated picture of the world, which, as abbreviature of
phenomena, cannot dispense with wonder. It is probable, however, that
nearly every one, upon close examination, feels so disintegrated by
the critico-historical spirit of our culture, that he can only perhaps
make the former existence of myth credible to himself by learned
means through intermediary abstractions. Without myth, however, every
culture loses its healthy, creative natural power: it is only a horizon
encompassed with myths which rounds off to unity a social movement.
It is only by myth that all the powers of the imagination and of the
Apollonian dream are freed from their random rovings. The mythical
figures have to be the invisibly omnipresent genii, under the care of
which the young soul grows to maturity, by the signs of which the man
gives a meaning to his life and struggles: and the state itself knows
no more powerful unwritten law than the mythical foundation which
vouches for its connection with religion and its growth from mythical
ideas.

Let us now place alongside thereof the abstract man proceeding
independently of myth, the abstract education, the abstract usage,
the abstract right, the abstract state: let us picture to ourselves
the lawless roving of the artistic imagination, not bridled by any
native myth: let us imagine a culture which has no fixed and sacred
primitive seat, but is doomed to exhaust all its possibilities, and
has to nourish itself wretchedly from the other cultures--such is the
Present, as the result of Socratism, which is bent on the destruction
of myth. And now the myth-less man remains eternally hungering among
all the bygones, and digs and grubs for roots, though he have to dig
for them even among the remotest antiquities. The stupendous historical
exigency of the unsatisfied modern culture, the gathering around one of
countless other cultures, the consuming desire for knowledge--what does
all this point to, if not to the loss of myth, the loss of the mythical
home, the mythical source? Let us ask ourselves whether the feverish
and so uncanny stirring of this culture is aught but the eager seizing
and snatching at food of the hungerer--and who would care to contribute
anything more to a culture which cannot be appeased by all it devours,
and in contact with which the most vigorous and wholesome nourishment
is wont to change into "history and criticism"?

We should also have to regard our German character with despair and
sorrow, if it had already become inextricably entangled in, or even
identical with this culture, in a similar manner as we can observe it
to our horror to be the case in civilised France; and that which for
a long time was the great advantage of France and the cause of her
vast preponderance, to wit, this very identity of people and culture,
might compel us at the sight thereof to congratulate ourselves that
this culture of ours, which is so questionable, has hitherto had
nothing in common with the noble kernel of the character of our people.
All our hopes, on the contrary, stretch out longingly towards the
perception that beneath this restlessly palpitating civilised life and
educational convulsion there is concealed a glorious, intrinsically
healthy, primeval power, which, to be sure, stirs vigorously only at
intervals in stupendous moments, and then dreams on again in view of
a future awakening. It is from this abyss that the German Reformation
came forth: in the choral-hymn of which the future melody of German
music first resounded. So deep, courageous, and soul-breathing, so
exuberantly good and tender did this chorale of Luther sound,--as the
first Dionysian-luring call which breaks forth from dense thickets
at the approach of spring. To it responded with emulative echo the
solemnly wanton procession of Dionysian revellers, to whom we are
indebted for German music--and to whom we shall be indebted for _the
re-birth of German myth._

I know that I must now lead the sympathising and attentive friend to
an elevated position of lonesome contemplation, where he will have
but few companions, and I call out encouragingly to him that we must
hold fast to our shining guides, the Greeks. For the rectification
of our æsthetic knowledge we previously borrowed from them the two
divine figures, each of which sways a separate realm of art, and
concerning whose mutual contact and exaltation we have acquired a
notion through Greek tragedy. Through a remarkable disruption of both
these primitive artistic impulses, the ruin of Greek tragedy seemed
to be necessarily brought about: with which process a degeneration
and a transmutation of the Greek national character was strictly in
keeping, summoning us to earnest reflection as to how closely and
necessarily art and the people, myth and custom, tragedy and the state,
have coalesced in their bases. The ruin of tragedy was at the same
time the ruin of myth. Until then the Greeks had been involuntarily
compelled immediately to associate all experiences with their myths,
indeed they had to comprehend them only through this association:
whereby even the most immediate present necessarily appeared to them
_sub specie æterni_ and in a certain sense as timeless. Into this
current of the timeless, however, the state as well as art plunged
in order to find repose from the burden and eagerness of the moment.
And a people--for the rest, also a man--is worth just as much only as
its ability to impress on its experiences the seal of eternity: for
it is thus, as it were, desecularised, and reveals its unconscious
inner conviction of the relativity of time and of the true, that is,
the metaphysical significance of life. The contrary happens when a
people begins to comprehend itself historically and to demolish the
mythical bulwarks around it: with which there is usually connected
a marked secularisation, a breach with the unconscious metaphysics
of its earlier existence, in all ethical consequences. Greek art and
especially Greek tragedy delayed above all the annihilation of myth:
it was necessary to annihilate these also to be able to live detached
from the native soil, unbridled in the wilderness of thought, custom,
and action. Even in such circumstances this metaphysical impulse still
endeavours to create for itself a form of apotheosis (weakened, no
doubt) in the Socratism of science urging to life: but on its lower
stage this same impulse led only to a feverish search, which gradually
merged into a pandemonium of myths and superstitions accumulated from
all quarters: in the midst of which, nevertheless, the Hellene sat with
a yearning heart till he contrived, as Græculus, to mask his fever with
Greek cheerfulness and Greek levity, or to narcotise himself completely
with some gloomy Oriental superstition.

We have approached this condition in the most striking manner since the
reawakening of the Alexandro--Roman antiquity in the fifteenth century,
after a long, not easily describable, interlude. On the heights there
is the same exuberant love of knowledge, the same insatiate happiness
of the discoverer, the same stupendous secularisation, and, together
with these, a homeless roving about, an eager intrusion at foreign
tables, a frivolous deification of the present or a dull senseless
estrangement, all _sub speci sæculi,_ of the present time: which
same symptoms lead one to infer the same defect at the heart of
this culture, the annihilation of myth. It seems hardly possible to
transplant a foreign myth with permanent success, without dreadfully
injuring the tree through this transplantation: which is perhaps
occasionally strong enough and sound enough to eliminate the foreign
element after a terrible struggle; but must ordinarily consume itself
in a languishing and stunted condition or in sickly luxuriance. Our
opinion of the pure and vigorous kernel of the German being is such
that we venture to expect of it, and only of it, this elimination of
forcibly ingrafted foreign elements, and we deem it possible that
the German spirit will reflect anew on itself. Perhaps many a one
will be of opinion that this spirit must begin its struggle with the
elimination of the Romanic element: for which it might recognise an
external preparation and encouragement in the victorious bravery and
bloody glory of the late war, but must seek the inner constraint in the
emulative zeal to be for ever worthy of the sublime protagonists on
this path, of Luther as well as our great artists and poets. But let
him never think he can fight such battles without his household gods,
without his mythical home, without a "restoration" of all German things
I And if the German should look timidly around for a guide to lead
him back to his long-lost home, the ways and paths of which he knows
no longer--let him but listen to the delightfully luring call of the
Dionysian bird, which hovers above him, and would fain point out to him
the way thither.



24.


Among the peculiar artistic effects of musical tragedy we had to
emphasise an Apollonian _illusion,_ through which we are to be saved
from immediate oneness with the Dionysian music, while our musical
excitement is able to discharge itself on an Apollonian domain and
in an interposed visible middle world. It thereby seemed to us that
precisely through this discharge the middle world of theatrical
procedure, the drama generally, became visible and intelligible from
within in a degree unattainable in the other forms of Apollonian art:
so that here, where this art was as it were winged and borne aloft by
the spirit of music, we had to recognise the highest exaltation of its
powers, and consequently in the fraternal union of Apollo and Dionysus
the climax of the Apollonian as well as of the Dionysian artistic aims.

Of course, the Apollonian light-picture did not, precisely with this
inner illumination through music, attain the peculiar effect of the
weaker grades of Apollonian art. What the epos and the animated stone
can do--constrain the contemplating eye to calm delight in the world
of the _individuatio_--could not be realised here, notwithstanding
the greater animation and distinctness. We contemplated the drama
and penetrated with piercing glance into its inner agitated world of
motives--and yet it seemed as if only a symbolic picture passed before
us, the profoundest significance of which we almost believed we had
divined, and which we desired to put aside like a curtain in order to
behold the original behind it. The greatest distinctness of the picture
did not suffice us: for it seemed to reveal as well as veil something;
and while it seemed, with its symbolic revelation, to invite the
rending of the veil for the disclosure of the mysterious background,
this illumined all-conspicuousness itself enthralled the eye and
prevented it from penetrating more deeply He who has not experienced
this,--to have to view, and at the same time to have a longing
beyond the viewing,--will hardly be able to conceive how clearly and
definitely these two processes coexist in the contemplation of tragic
myth and are felt to be conjoined; while the truly æsthetic spectators
will confirm my assertion that among the peculiar effects of tragedy
this conjunction is the most noteworthy. Now let this phenomenon of the
æsthetic spectator be transferred to an analogous process in the tragic
artist, and the genesis of _tragic myth_ will have been understood. It
shares with the Apollonian sphere of art the full delight in appearance
and contemplation, and at the same time it denies this delight and
finds a still higher satisfaction in the annihilation of the visible
world of appearance. The substance of tragic myth is first of all an
epic event involving the glorification of the fighting hero: but whence
originates the essentially enigmatical trait, that the suffering in
the fate of the hero, the most painful victories, the most agonising
contrasts of motives, in short, the exemplification of the wisdom of
Silenus, or, æsthetically expressed, the Ugly and Discordant, is always
represented anew in such countless forms with such predilection, and
precisely in the most youthful and exuberant age of a people, unless
there is really a higher delight experienced in all this?

For the fact that things actually take such a tragic course would
least of all explain the origin of a form of art; provided that art
is not merely an imitation of the reality of nature, but in truth a
metaphysical supplement to the reality of nature, placed alongside
thereof for its conquest. Tragic myth, in so far as it really belongs
to art, also fully participates in this transfiguring metaphysical
purpose of art in general: What does it transfigure, however, when it
presents the phenomenal world in the guise of the suffering hero? Least
of all the "reality" of this phenomenal world, for it says to us: "Look
at this! Look carefully! It is your life! It is the hour-hand of your
clock of existence!"

And myth has displayed this life, in order thereby to transfigure it
to us? If not, how shall we account for the æsthetic pleasure with
which we make even these representations pass before us? I am inquiring
concerning the æsthetic pleasure, and am well aware that many of
these representations may moreover occasionally create even a moral
delectation, say under the form of pity or of a moral triumph. But he
who would derive the effect of the tragic exclusively from these moral
sources, as was usually the case far too long in æsthetics, let him not
think that he has done anything for Art thereby; for Art must above all
insist on purity in her domain. For the explanation of tragic myth the
very first requirement is that the pleasure which characterises it must
be sought in the purely æsthetic sphere, without encroaching on the
domain of pity, fear, or the morally-sublime. How can the ugly and the
discordant, the substance of tragic myth, excite an æsthetic pleasure?

Here it is necessary to raise ourselves with a daring bound into a
metaphysics of Art. I repeat, therefore, my former proposition, that
it is only as an æsthetic phenomenon that existence and the world,
appear justified: and in this sense it is precisely the function of
tragic myth to convince us that even the Ugly and Discordant is an
artistic game which the will, in the eternal fulness of its joy, plays
with itself. But this not easily comprehensible proto-phenomenon of
Dionysian Art becomes, in a direct way, singularly intelligible, and
is immediately apprehended in the wonderful significance of _musical
dissonance:_ just as in general it is music alone, placed in contrast
to the world, which can give us an idea as to what is meant by the
justification of the world as an æsthetic phenomenon. The joy that the
tragic myth excites has the same origin as the joyful sensation of
dissonance in music. The Dionysian, with its primitive joy experienced
in pain itself, is the common source of music and tragic myth.

Is it not possible that by calling to our aid the musical relation of
dissonance, the difficult problem of tragic effect may have meanwhile
been materially facilitated? For we now understand what it means to
wish to view tragedy and at the same time to have a longing beyond the
viewing: a frame of mind, which, as regards the artistically employed
dissonance, we should simply have to characterise by saying that we
desire to hear and at the same time have a longing beyond the hearing.
That striving for the infinite, the pinion-flapping of longing,
accompanying the highest delight in the clearly-perceived reality,
remind one that in both states we have to recognise a Dionysian
phenomenon, which again and again reveals to us anew the playful
up-building and demolishing of the world of individuals as the efflux
of a primitive delight, in like manner as when Heraclitus the Obscure
compares the world-building power to a playing child which places
stones here and there and builds sandhills only to overthrow them again.

Hence, in order to form a true estimate of the Dionysian capacity of
a people, it would seem that we must think not only of their music,
but just as much of their tragic myth, the second witness of this
capacity. Considering this most intimate relationship between music
and myth, we may now in like manner suppose that a degeneration and
depravation of the one involves a deterioration of the other: if it be
true at all that the weakening of the myth is generally expressive of
a debilitation of the Dionysian capacity. Concerning both, however,
a glance at the development of the German genius should not leave
us in any doubt; in the opera just as in the abstract character of
our myth-less existence, in an art sunk to pastime just as in a life
guided by concepts, the inartistic as well as life-consuming nature
of Socratic optimism had revealed itself to us. Yet there have been
indications to console us that nevertheless in some inaccessible abyss
the German spirit still rests and dreams, undestroyed, in glorious
health, profundity, and Dionysian strength, like a knight sunk in
slumber: from which abyss the Dionysian song rises to us to let us
know that this German knight even still dreams his primitive Dionysian
myth in blissfully earnest visions. Let no one believe that the German
spirit has for ever lost its mythical home when it still understands so
obviously the voices of the birds which tell of that home. Some day it
will find itself awake in all the morning freshness of a deep sleep:
then it will slay the dragons, destroy the malignant dwarfs, and waken
Brünnhilde--and Wotan's spear itself will be unable to obstruct its
course!

My friends, ye who believe in Dionysian music, ye know also what
tragedy means to us. There we have tragic myth, born anew from
music,--and in this latest birth ye can hope for everything and forget
what is most afflicting. What is most afflicting to all of us, however,
is--the prolonged degradation in which the German genius has lived
estranged from house and home in the service of malignant dwarfs. Ye
understand my allusion--as ye will also, in conclusion, understand my
hopes.



25.


Music and tragic myth are equally the expression of the Dionysian
capacity of a people, and are inseparable from each other. Both
originate in an ultra Apollonian sphere of art; both transfigure a
region in the delightful accords of which all dissonance, just like
the terrible picture of the world, dies charmingly away; both play
with the sting of displeasure, trusting to their most potent magic;
both justify thereby the existence even of the "worst world." Here
the Dionysian, as compared with the Apollonian, exhibits itself as
the eternal and original artistic force, which in general calls into
existence the entire world of phenomena: in the midst of which a new
transfiguring appearance becomes necessary, in order to keep alive the
animated world of individuation. If we could conceive an incarnation
of dissonance--and what is man but that?--then, to be able to live
this dissonance would require a glorious illusion which would spread
a veil of beauty over its peculiar nature. This is the true function
of Apollo as deity of art: in whose name we comprise all the countless
manifestations of the fair realm of illusion, which each moment render
life in general worth living and make one impatient for the experience
of the next moment.

At the same time, just as much of this basis of all existence--the
Dionysian substratum of the world--is allowed to enter into the
consciousness of human beings, as can be surmounted again by the
Apollonian transfiguring power, so that these two art-impulses are
constrained to develop their powers in strictly mutual proportion,
according to the law of eternal justice. When the Dionysian powers rise
with such vehemence as we experience at present, there can be no doubt
that, veiled in a cloud, Apollo has already descended to us; whose
grandest beautifying influences a coming generation will perhaps behold.

That this effect is necessary, however, each one would most surely
perceive by intuition, if once he found himself carried back--even in
a dream--into an Old-Hellenic existence. In walking under high Ionic
colonnades, looking upwards to a horizon defined by clear and noble
lines, with reflections of his transfigured form by his side in shining
marble, and around him solemnly marching or quietly moving men, with
harmoniously sounding voices and rhythmical pantomime, would he not in
the presence of this perpetual influx of beauty have to raise his hand
to Apollo and exclaim: "Blessed race of Hellenes! How great Dionysus
must be among you, when the Delian god deems such charms necessary
to cure you of your dithyrambic madness!"--To one in this frame of
mind, however, an aged Athenian, looking up to him with the sublime
eye of Æschylus, might answer: "Say also this, thou curious stranger:
what sufferings this people must have undergone, in order to be able
to become thus beautiful! But now follow me to a tragic play, and
sacrifice with me in the temple of both the deities!"

SUPPOSING that Truth is a woman--what then? Is there not ground
for suspecting that all philosophers, in so far as they have been
dogmatists, have failed to understand women--that the terrible
seriousness and clumsy importunity with which they have usually paid
their addresses to Truth, have been unskilled and unseemly methods for
winning a woman? Certainly she has never allowed herself to be won; and
at present every kind of dogma stands with sad and discouraged mien--IF,
indeed, it stands at all! For there are scoffers who maintain that it
has fallen, that all dogma lies on the ground--nay more, that it is at
its last gasp. But to speak seriously, there are good grounds for hoping
that all dogmatizing in philosophy, whatever solemn, whatever conclusive
and decided airs it has assumed, may have been only a noble puerilism
and tyronism; and probably the time is at hand when it will be once
and again understood WHAT has actually sufficed for the basis of such
imposing and absolute philosophical edifices as the dogmatists have
hitherto reared: perhaps some popular superstition of immemorial time
(such as the soul-superstition, which, in the form of subject- and
ego-superstition, has not yet ceased doing mischief): perhaps some
play upon words, a deception on the part of grammar, or an
audacious generalization of very restricted, very personal, very
human--all-too-human facts. The philosophy of the dogmatists, it is to
be hoped, was only a promise for thousands of years afterwards, as was
astrology in still earlier times, in the service of which probably more
labour, gold, acuteness, and patience have been spent than on any
actual science hitherto: we owe to it, and to its "super-terrestrial"
pretensions in Asia and Egypt, the grand style of architecture. It seems
that in order to inscribe themselves upon the heart of humanity with
everlasting claims, all great things have first to wander about the
earth as enormous and awe-inspiring caricatures: dogmatic philosophy has
been a caricature of this kind--for instance, the Vedanta doctrine in
Asia, and Platonism in Europe. Let us not be ungrateful to it, although
it must certainly be confessed that the worst, the most tiresome,
and the most dangerous of errors hitherto has been a dogmatist
error--namely, Plato's invention of Pure Spirit and the Good in Itself.
But now when it has been surmounted, when Europe, rid of this nightmare,
can again draw breath freely and at least enjoy a healthier--sleep,
we, WHOSE DUTY IS WAKEFULNESS ITSELF, are the heirs of all the strength
which the struggle against this error has fostered. It amounted to
the very inversion of truth, and the denial of the PERSPECTIVE--the
fundamental condition--of life, to speak of Spirit and the Good as Plato
spoke of them; indeed one might ask, as a physician: "How did such a
malady attack that finest product of antiquity, Plato? Had the wicked
Socrates really corrupted him? Was Socrates after all a corrupter of
youths, and deserved his hemlock?" But the struggle against Plato,
or--to speak plainer, and for the "people"--the struggle against
the ecclesiastical oppression of millenniums of Christianity (FOR
CHRISTIANITY IS PLATONISM FOR THE "PEOPLE"), produced in Europe
a magnificent tension of soul, such as had not existed anywhere
previously; with such a tensely strained bow one can now aim at the
furthest goals. As a matter of fact, the European feels this tension as
a state of distress, and twice attempts have been made in grand style to
unbend the bow: once by means of Jesuitism, and the second time by means
of democratic enlightenment--which, with the aid of liberty of the press
and newspaper-reading, might, in fact, bring it about that the spirit
would not so easily find itself in "distress"! (The Germans invented
gunpowder--all credit to them! but they again made things square--they
invented printing.) But we, who are neither Jesuits, nor democrats,
nor even sufficiently Germans, we GOOD EUROPEANS, and free, VERY free
spirits--we have it still, all the distress of spirit and all the
tension of its bow! And perhaps also the arrow, the duty, and, who
knows? THE GOAL TO AIM AT....

Sils Maria Upper Engadine, JUNE, 1885.




CHAPTER I. PREJUDICES OF PHILOSOPHERS


1. The Will to Truth, which is to tempt us to many a hazardous
enterprise, the famous Truthfulness of which all philosophers have
hitherto spoken with respect, what questions has this Will to Truth not
laid before us! What strange, perplexing, questionable questions! It is
already a long story; yet it seems as if it were hardly commenced. Is
it any wonder if we at last grow distrustful, lose patience, and turn
impatiently away? That this Sphinx teaches us at last to ask questions
ourselves? WHO is it really that puts questions to us here? WHAT really
is this "Will to Truth" in us? In fact we made a long halt at the
question as to the origin of this Will--until at last we came to an
absolute standstill before a yet more fundamental question. We inquired
about the VALUE of this Will. Granted that we want the truth: WHY NOT
RATHER untruth? And uncertainty? Even ignorance? The problem of the
value of truth presented itself before us--or was it we who presented
ourselves before the problem? Which of us is the Oedipus here? Which
the Sphinx? It would seem to be a rendezvous of questions and notes of
interrogation. And could it be believed that it at last seems to us as
if the problem had never been propounded before, as if we were the first
to discern it, get a sight of it, and RISK RAISING it? For there is risk
in raising it, perhaps there is no greater risk.

2. "HOW COULD anything originate out of its opposite? For example, truth
out of error? or the Will to Truth out of the will to deception? or the
generous deed out of selfishness? or the pure sun-bright vision of the
wise man out of covetousness? Such genesis is impossible; whoever dreams
of it is a fool, nay, worse than a fool; things of the highest
value must have a different origin, an origin of THEIR own--in this
transitory, seductive, illusory, paltry world, in this turmoil of
delusion and cupidity, they cannot have their source. But rather in
the lap of Being, in the intransitory, in the concealed God, in the
'Thing-in-itself--THERE must be their source, and nowhere else!"--This
mode of reasoning discloses the typical prejudice by which
metaphysicians of all times can be recognized, this mode of valuation
is at the back of all their logical procedure; through this "belief" of
theirs, they exert themselves for their "knowledge," for something that
is in the end solemnly christened "the Truth." The fundamental belief of
metaphysicians is THE BELIEF IN ANTITHESES OF VALUES. It never occurred
even to the wariest of them to doubt here on the very threshold (where
doubt, however, was most necessary); though they had made a solemn
vow, "DE OMNIBUS DUBITANDUM." For it may be doubted, firstly, whether
antitheses exist at all; and secondly, whether the popular valuations
and antitheses of value upon which metaphysicians have set their
seal, are not perhaps merely superficial estimates, merely provisional
perspectives, besides being probably made from some corner, perhaps from
below--"frog perspectives," as it were, to borrow an expression current
among painters. In spite of all the value which may belong to the true,
the positive, and the unselfish, it might be possible that a higher
and more fundamental value for life generally should be assigned to
pretence, to the will to delusion, to selfishness, and cupidity. It
might even be possible that WHAT constitutes the value of those good and
respected things, consists precisely in their being insidiously
related, knotted, and crocheted to these evil and apparently opposed
things--perhaps even in being essentially identical with them. Perhaps!
But who wishes to concern himself with such dangerous "Perhapses"!
For that investigation one must await the advent of a new order of
philosophers, such as will have other tastes and inclinations, the
reverse of those hitherto prevalent--philosophers of the dangerous
"Perhaps" in every sense of the term. And to speak in all seriousness, I
see such new philosophers beginning to appear.

3. Having kept a sharp eye on philosophers, and having read between
their lines long enough, I now say to myself that the greater part of
conscious thinking must be counted among the instinctive functions, and
it is so even in the case of philosophical thinking; one has here to
learn anew, as one learned anew about heredity and "innateness." As
little as the act of birth comes into consideration in the whole process
and procedure of heredity, just as little is "being-conscious" OPPOSED
to the instinctive in any decisive sense; the greater part of the
conscious thinking of a philosopher is secretly influenced by his
instincts, and forced into definite channels. And behind all logic and
its seeming sovereignty of movement, there are valuations, or to speak
more plainly, physiological demands, for the maintenance of a definite
mode of life For example, that the certain is worth more than the
uncertain, that illusion is less valuable than "truth" such valuations,
in spite of their regulative importance for US, might notwithstanding be
only superficial valuations, special kinds of _niaiserie_, such as may
be necessary for the maintenance of beings such as ourselves. Supposing,
in effect, that man is not just the "measure of things."

4. The falseness of an opinion is not for us any objection to it: it is
here, perhaps, that our new language sounds most strangely. The
question is, how far an opinion is life-furthering, life-preserving,
species-preserving, perhaps species-rearing, and we are fundamentally
inclined to maintain that the falsest opinions (to which the synthetic
judgments a priori belong), are the most indispensable to us, that
without a recognition of logical fictions, without a comparison of
reality with the purely IMAGINED world of the absolute and immutable,
without a constant counterfeiting of the world by means of numbers,
man could not live--that the renunciation of false opinions would be
a renunciation of life, a negation of life. TO RECOGNISE UNTRUTH AS A
CONDITION OF LIFE; that is certainly to impugn the traditional ideas of
value in a dangerous manner, and a philosophy which ventures to do so,
has thereby alone placed itself beyond good and evil.

5. That which causes philosophers to be regarded half-distrustfully
and half-mockingly, is not the oft-repeated discovery how innocent they
are--how often and easily they make mistakes and lose their way, in
short, how childish and childlike they are,--but that there is not
enough honest dealing with them, whereas they all raise a loud and
virtuous outcry when the problem of truthfulness is even hinted at in
the remotest manner. They all pose as though their real opinions had
been discovered and attained through the self-evolving of a cold, pure,
divinely indifferent dialectic (in contrast to all sorts of mystics,
who, fairer and foolisher, talk of "inspiration"), whereas, in fact, a
prejudiced proposition, idea, or "suggestion," which is generally
their heart's desire abstracted and refined, is defended by them with
arguments sought out after the event. They are all advocates who do not
wish to be regarded as such, generally astute defenders, also, of their
prejudices, which they dub "truths,"--and VERY far from having the
conscience which bravely admits this to itself, very far from having
the good taste of the courage which goes so far as to let this be
understood, perhaps to warn friend or foe, or in cheerful confidence
and self-ridicule. The spectacle of the Tartuffery of old Kant, equally
stiff and decent, with which he entices us into the dialectic
by-ways that lead (more correctly mislead) to his "categorical
imperative"--makes us fastidious ones smile, we who find no small
amusement in spying out the subtle tricks of old moralists and ethical
preachers. Or, still more so, the hocus-pocus in mathematical form, by
means of which Spinoza has, as it were, clad his philosophy in mail and
mask--in fact, the "love of HIS wisdom," to translate the term fairly
and squarely--in order thereby to strike terror at once into the heart
of the assailant who should dare to cast a glance on that invincible
maiden, that Pallas Athene:--how much of personal timidity and
vulnerability does this masquerade of a sickly recluse betray!

6. It has gradually become clear to me what every great philosophy up
till now has consisted of--namely, the confession of its originator, and
a species of involuntary and unconscious auto-biography; and moreover
that the moral (or immoral) purpose in every philosophy has constituted
the true vital germ out of which the entire plant has always grown.
Indeed, to understand how the abstrusest metaphysical assertions of a
philosopher have been arrived at, it is always well (and wise) to first
ask oneself: "What morality do they (or does he) aim at?" Accordingly,
I do not believe that an "impulse to knowledge" is the father of
philosophy; but that another impulse, here as elsewhere, has only made
use of knowledge (and mistaken knowledge!) as an instrument. But whoever
considers the fundamental impulses of man with a view to determining
how far they may have here acted as INSPIRING GENII (or as demons and
cobolds), will find that they have all practiced philosophy at one time
or another, and that each one of them would have been only too glad to
look upon itself as the ultimate end of existence and the legitimate
LORD over all the other impulses. For every impulse is imperious, and as
SUCH, attempts to philosophize. To be sure, in the case of scholars, in
the case of really scientific men, it may be otherwise--"better," if
you will; there there may really be such a thing as an "impulse to
knowledge," some kind of small, independent clock-work, which, when well
wound up, works away industriously to that end, WITHOUT the rest of
the scholarly impulses taking any material part therein. The actual
"interests" of the scholar, therefore, are generally in quite another
direction--in the family, perhaps, or in money-making, or in politics;
it is, in fact, almost indifferent at what point of research his little
machine is placed, and whether the hopeful young worker becomes a
good philologist, a mushroom specialist, or a chemist; he is not
CHARACTERISED by becoming this or that. In the philosopher, on the
contrary, there is absolutely nothing impersonal; and above all,
his morality furnishes a decided and decisive testimony as to WHO HE
IS,--that is to say, in what order the deepest impulses of his nature
stand to each other.

7. How malicious philosophers can be! I know of nothing more stinging
than the joke Epicurus took the liberty of making on Plato and the
Platonists; he called them Dionysiokolakes. In its original sense,
and on the face of it, the word signifies "Flatterers of
Dionysius"--consequently, tyrants' accessories and lick-spittles;
besides this, however, it is as much as to say, "They are all ACTORS,
there is nothing genuine about them" (for Dionysiokolax was a popular
name for an actor). And the latter is really the malignant reproach that
Epicurus cast upon Plato: he was annoyed by the grandiose manner, the
mise en scene style of which Plato and his scholars were masters--of
which Epicurus was not a master! He, the old school-teacher of Samos,
who sat concealed in his little garden at Athens, and wrote three
hundred books, perhaps out of rage and ambitious envy of Plato, who
knows! Greece took a hundred years to find out who the garden-god
Epicurus really was. Did she ever find out?

8. There is a point in every philosophy at which the "conviction" of
the philosopher appears on the scene; or, to put it in the words of an
ancient mystery:

Adventavit asinus, Pulcher et fortissimus.

9. You desire to LIVE "according to Nature"? Oh, you noble Stoics, what
fraud of words! Imagine to yourselves a being like Nature, boundlessly
extravagant, boundlessly indifferent, without purpose or consideration,
without pity or justice, at once fruitful and barren and uncertain:
imagine to yourselves INDIFFERENCE as a power--how COULD you live
in accordance with such indifference? To live--is not that just
endeavouring to be otherwise than this Nature? Is not living valuing,
preferring, being unjust, being limited, endeavouring to be different?
And granted that your imperative, "living according to Nature," means
actually the same as "living according to life"--how could you do
DIFFERENTLY? Why should you make a principle out of what you yourselves
are, and must be? In reality, however, it is quite otherwise with you:
while you pretend to read with rapture the canon of your law in Nature,
you want something quite the contrary, you extraordinary stage-players
and self-deluders! In your pride you wish to dictate your morals and
ideals to Nature, to Nature herself, and to incorporate them therein;
you insist that it shall be Nature "according to the Stoa," and would
like everything to be made after your own image, as a vast, eternal
glorification and generalism of Stoicism! With all your love for truth,
you have forced yourselves so long, so persistently, and with such
hypnotic rigidity to see Nature FALSELY, that is to say, Stoically,
that you are no longer able to see it otherwise--and to crown all, some
unfathomable superciliousness gives you the Bedlamite hope that
BECAUSE you are able to tyrannize over yourselves--Stoicism is
self-tyranny--Nature will also allow herself to be tyrannized over: is
not the Stoic a PART of Nature?... But this is an old and everlasting
story: what happened in old times with the Stoics still happens today,
as soon as ever a philosophy begins to believe in itself. It always
creates the world in its own image; it cannot do otherwise; philosophy
is this tyrannical impulse itself, the most spiritual Will to Power, the
will to "creation of the world," the will to the causa prima.

10. The eagerness and subtlety, I should even say craftiness, with
which the problem of "the real and the apparent world" is dealt with at
present throughout Europe, furnishes food for thought and attention; and
he who hears only a "Will to Truth" in the background, and nothing else,
cannot certainly boast of the sharpest ears. In rare and isolated
cases, it may really have happened that such a Will to Truth--a certain
extravagant and adventurous pluck, a metaphysician's ambition of the
forlorn hope--has participated therein: that which in the end always
prefers a handful of "certainty" to a whole cartload of beautiful
possibilities; there may even be puritanical fanatics of conscience,
who prefer to put their last trust in a sure nothing, rather than in an
uncertain something. But that is Nihilism, and the sign of a despairing,
mortally wearied soul, notwithstanding the courageous bearing such a
virtue may display. It seems, however, to be otherwise with stronger
and livelier thinkers who are still eager for life. In that they side
AGAINST appearance, and speak superciliously of "perspective," in
that they rank the credibility of their own bodies about as low as the
credibility of the ocular evidence that "the earth stands still," and
thus, apparently, allowing with complacency their securest possession
to escape (for what does one at present believe in more firmly than
in one's body?),--who knows if they are not really trying to win back
something which was formerly an even securer possession, something
of the old domain of the faith of former times, perhaps the "immortal
soul," perhaps "the old God," in short, ideas by which they could live
better, that is to say, more vigorously and more joyously, than by
"modern ideas"? There is DISTRUST of these modern ideas in this mode
of looking at things, a disbelief in all that has been constructed
yesterday and today; there is perhaps some slight admixture of satiety
and scorn, which can no longer endure the BRIC-A-BRAC of ideas of the
most varied origin, such as so-called Positivism at present throws on
the market; a disgust of the more refined taste at the village-fair
motleyness and patchiness of all these reality-philosophasters, in whom
there is nothing either new or true, except this motleyness. Therein it
seems to me that we should agree with those skeptical anti-realists and
knowledge-microscopists of the present day; their instinct, which repels
them from MODERN reality, is unrefuted... what do their retrograde
by-paths concern us! The main thing about them is NOT that they wish
to go "back," but that they wish to get AWAY therefrom. A little MORE
strength, swing, courage, and artistic power, and they would be OFF--and
not back!

11. It seems to me that there is everywhere an attempt at present to
divert attention from the actual influence which Kant exercised on
German philosophy, and especially to ignore prudently the value which
he set upon himself. Kant was first and foremost proud of his Table of
Categories; with it in his hand he said: "This is the most difficult
thing that could ever be undertaken on behalf of metaphysics." Let us
only understand this "could be"! He was proud of having DISCOVERED a
new faculty in man, the faculty of synthetic judgment a priori. Granting
that he deceived himself in this matter; the development and rapid
flourishing of German philosophy depended nevertheless on his pride, and
on the eager rivalry of the younger generation to discover if possible
something--at all events "new faculties"--of which to be still
prouder!--But let us reflect for a moment--it is high time to do so.
"How are synthetic judgments a priori POSSIBLE?" Kant asks himself--and
what is really his answer? "BY MEANS OF A MEANS (faculty)"--but
unfortunately not in five words, but so circumstantially, imposingly,
and with such display of German profundity and verbal flourishes, that
one altogether loses sight of the comical niaiserie allemande involved
in such an answer. People were beside themselves with delight over this
new faculty, and the jubilation reached its climax when Kant further
discovered a moral faculty in man--for at that time Germans were still
moral, not yet dabbling in the "Politics of hard fact." Then came
the honeymoon of German philosophy. All the young theologians of the
Tubingen institution went immediately into the groves--all seeking for
"faculties." And what did they not find--in that innocent, rich, and
still youthful period of the German spirit, to which Romanticism, the
malicious fairy, piped and sang, when one could not yet distinguish
between "finding" and "inventing"! Above all a faculty for the
"transcendental"; Schelling christened it, intellectual intuition,
and thereby gratified the most earnest longings of the naturally
pious-inclined Germans. One can do no greater wrong to the whole of
this exuberant and eccentric movement (which was really youthfulness,
notwithstanding that it disguised itself so boldly, in hoary and senile
conceptions), than to take it seriously, or even treat it with moral
indignation. Enough, however--the world grew older, and the dream
vanished. A time came when people rubbed their foreheads, and they still
rub them today. People had been dreaming, and first and foremost--old
Kant. "By means of a means (faculty)"--he had said, or at least meant to
say. But, is that--an answer? An explanation? Or is it not rather merely
a repetition of the question? How does opium induce sleep? "By means of
a means (faculty)," namely the virtus dormitiva, replies the doctor in
Moliere,

    Quia est in eo virtus dormitiva,
    Cujus est natura sensus assoupire.

But such replies belong to the realm of comedy, and it is high time
to replace the Kantian question, "How are synthetic judgments a PRIORI
possible?" by another question, "Why is belief in such judgments
necessary?"--in effect, it is high time that we should understand
that such judgments must be believed to be true, for the sake of the
preservation of creatures like ourselves; though they still might
naturally be false judgments! Or, more plainly spoken, and roughly and
readily--synthetic judgments a priori should not "be possible" at all;
we have no right to them; in our mouths they are nothing but false
judgments. Only, of course, the belief in their truth is necessary, as
plausible belief and ocular evidence belonging to the perspective view
of life. And finally, to call to mind the enormous influence which
"German philosophy"--I hope you understand its right to inverted commas
(goosefeet)?--has exercised throughout the whole of Europe, there is
no doubt that a certain VIRTUS DORMITIVA had a share in it; thanks to
German philosophy, it was a delight to the noble idlers, the virtuous,
the mystics, the artiste, the three-fourths Christians, and the
political obscurantists of all nations, to find an antidote to the still
overwhelming sensualism which overflowed from the last century into
this, in short--"sensus assoupire."...

12. As regards materialistic atomism, it is one of the best-refuted
theories that have been advanced, and in Europe there is now perhaps
no one in the learned world so unscholarly as to attach serious
signification to it, except for convenient everyday use (as an
abbreviation of the means of expression)--thanks chiefly to the Pole
Boscovich: he and the Pole Copernicus have hitherto been the greatest
and most successful opponents of ocular evidence. For while Copernicus
has persuaded us to believe, contrary to all the senses, that the earth
does NOT stand fast, Boscovich has taught us to abjure the belief in the
last thing that "stood fast" of the earth--the belief in "substance," in
"matter," in the earth-residuum, and particle-atom: it is the greatest
triumph over the senses that has hitherto been gained on earth. One
must, however, go still further, and also declare war, relentless war
to the knife, against the "atomistic requirements" which still lead a
dangerous after-life in places where no one suspects them, like the more
celebrated "metaphysical requirements": one must also above all give
the finishing stroke to that other and more portentous atomism which
Christianity has taught best and longest, the SOUL-ATOMISM. Let it be
permitted to designate by this expression the belief which regards the
soul as something indestructible, eternal, indivisible, as a monad,
as an atomon: this belief ought to be expelled from science! Between
ourselves, it is not at all necessary to get rid of "the soul" thereby,
and thus renounce one of the oldest and most venerated hypotheses--as
happens frequently to the clumsiness of naturalists, who can hardly
touch on the soul without immediately losing it. But the way is open
for new acceptations and refinements of the soul-hypothesis; and such
conceptions as "mortal soul," and "soul of subjective multiplicity,"
and "soul as social structure of the instincts and passions," want
henceforth to have legitimate rights in science. In that the NEW
psychologist is about to put an end to the superstitions which have
hitherto flourished with almost tropical luxuriance around the idea of
the soul, he is really, as it were, thrusting himself into a new desert
and a new distrust--it is possible that the older psychologists had a
merrier and more comfortable time of it; eventually, however, he finds
that precisely thereby he is also condemned to INVENT--and, who knows?
perhaps to DISCOVER the new.

13. Psychologists should bethink themselves before putting down the
instinct of self-preservation as the cardinal instinct of an organic
being. A living thing seeks above all to DISCHARGE its strength--life
itself is WILL TO POWER; self-preservation is only one of the indirect
and most frequent RESULTS thereof. In short, here, as everywhere else,
let us beware of SUPERFLUOUS teleological principles!--one of which
is the instinct of self-preservation (we owe it to Spinoza's
inconsistency). It is thus, in effect, that method ordains, which must
be essentially economy of principles.

14. It is perhaps just dawning on five or six minds that natural
philosophy is only a world-exposition and world-arrangement (according
to us, if I may say so!) and NOT a world-explanation; but in so far as
it is based on belief in the senses, it is regarded as more, and for a
long time to come must be regarded as more--namely, as an explanation.
It has eyes and fingers of its own, it has ocular evidence and
palpableness of its own: this operates fascinatingly, persuasively, and
CONVINCINGLY upon an age with fundamentally plebeian tastes--in fact, it
follows instinctively the canon of truth of eternal popular sensualism.
What is clear, what is "explained"? Only that which can be seen and
felt--one must pursue every problem thus far. Obversely, however, the
charm of the Platonic mode of thought, which was an ARISTOCRATIC mode,
consisted precisely in RESISTANCE to obvious sense-evidence--perhaps
among men who enjoyed even stronger and more fastidious senses than our
contemporaries, but who knew how to find a higher triumph in remaining
masters of them: and this by means of pale, cold, grey conceptional
networks which they threw over the motley whirl of the senses--the
mob of the senses, as Plato said. In this overcoming of the world, and
interpreting of the world in the manner of Plato, there was an ENJOYMENT
different from that which the physicists of today offer us--and likewise
the Darwinists and anti-teleologists among the physiological workers,
with their principle of the "smallest possible effort," and the greatest
possible blunder. "Where there is nothing more to see or to grasp, there
is also nothing more for men to do"--that is certainly an imperative
different from the Platonic one, but it may notwithstanding be the right
imperative for a hardy, laborious race of machinists and bridge-builders
of the future, who have nothing but ROUGH work to perform.

15. To study physiology with a clear conscience, one must insist on
the fact that the sense-organs are not phenomena in the sense of the
idealistic philosophy; as such they certainly could not be causes!
Sensualism, therefore, at least as regulative hypothesis, if not as
heuristic principle. What? And others say even that the external world
is the work of our organs? But then our body, as a part of this external
world, would be the work of our organs! But then our organs themselves
would be the work of our organs! It seems to me that this is a
complete REDUCTIO AD ABSURDUM, if the conception CAUSA SUI is something
fundamentally absurd. Consequently, the external world is NOT the work
of our organs--?

16. There are still harmless self-observers who believe that there are
"immediate certainties"; for instance, "I think," or as the superstition
of Schopenhauer puts it, "I will"; as though cognition here got hold
of its object purely and simply as "the thing in itself," without any
falsification taking place either on the part of the subject or the
object. I would repeat it, however, a hundred times, that "immediate
certainty," as well as "absolute knowledge" and the "thing in itself,"
involve a CONTRADICTIO IN ADJECTO; we really ought to free ourselves
from the misleading significance of words! The people on their part may
think that cognition is knowing all about things, but the philosopher
must say to himself: "When I analyze the process that is expressed in
the sentence, 'I think,' I find a whole series of daring assertions, the
argumentative proof of which would be difficult, perhaps impossible:
for instance, that it is _I_ who think, that there must necessarily be
something that thinks, that thinking is an activity and operation on the
part of a being who is thought of as a cause, that there is an 'ego,'
and finally, that it is already determined what is to be designated by
thinking--that I KNOW what thinking is. For if I had not already decided
within myself what it is, by what standard could I determine whether
that which is just happening is not perhaps 'willing' or 'feeling'? In
short, the assertion 'I think,' assumes that I COMPARE my state at the
present moment with other states of myself which I know, in order to
determine what it is; on account of this retrospective connection with
further 'knowledge,' it has, at any rate, no immediate certainty for
me."--In place of the "immediate certainty" in which the people may
believe in the special case, the philosopher thus finds a series of
metaphysical questions presented to him, veritable conscience questions
of the intellect, to wit: "Whence did I get the notion of 'thinking'?
Why do I believe in cause and effect? What gives me the right to speak
of an 'ego,' and even of an 'ego' as cause, and finally of an 'ego'
as cause of thought?" He who ventures to answer these metaphysical
questions at once by an appeal to a sort of INTUITIVE perception, like
the person who says, "I think, and know that this, at least, is
true, actual, and certain"--will encounter a smile and two notes of
interrogation in a philosopher nowadays. "Sir," the philosopher will
perhaps give him to understand, "it is improbable that you are not
mistaken, but why should it be the truth?"

17. With regard to the superstitions of logicians, I shall never tire
of emphasizing a small, terse fact, which is unwillingly recognized by
these credulous minds--namely, that a thought comes when "it" wishes,
and not when "I" wish; so that it is a PERVERSION of the facts of the
case to say that the subject "I" is the condition of the predicate
"think." ONE thinks; but that this "one" is precisely the famous old
"ego," is, to put it mildly, only a supposition, an assertion, and
assuredly not an "immediate certainty." After all, one has even gone too
far with this "one thinks"--even the "one" contains an INTERPRETATION of
the process, and does not belong to the process itself. One infers here
according to the usual grammatical formula--"To think is an activity;
every activity requires an agency that is active; consequently"... It
was pretty much on the same lines that the older atomism sought, besides
the operating "power," the material particle wherein it resides and out
of which it operates--the atom. More rigorous minds, however, learnt at
last to get along without this "earth-residuum," and perhaps some day we
shall accustom ourselves, even from the logician's point of view, to
get along without the little "one" (to which the worthy old "ego" has
refined itself).

18. It is certainly not the least charm of a theory that it is
refutable; it is precisely thereby that it attracts the more subtle
minds. It seems that the hundred-times-refuted theory of the "free will"
owes its persistence to this charm alone; some one is always appearing
who feels himself strong enough to refute it.

19. Philosophers are accustomed to speak of the will as though it were
the best-known thing in the world; indeed, Schopenhauer has given us
to understand that the will alone is really known to us, absolutely and
completely known, without deduction or addition. But it again and
again seems to me that in this case Schopenhauer also only did what
philosophers are in the habit of doing--he seems to have adopted a
POPULAR PREJUDICE and exaggerated it. Willing seems to me to be above
all something COMPLICATED, something that is a unity only in name--and
it is precisely in a name that popular prejudice lurks, which has got
the mastery over the inadequate precautions of philosophers in all ages.
So let us for once be more cautious, let us be "unphilosophical": let
us say that in all willing there is firstly a plurality of sensations,
namely, the sensation of the condition "AWAY FROM WHICH we go," the
sensation of the condition "TOWARDS WHICH we go," the sensation of this
"FROM" and "TOWARDS" itself, and then besides, an accompanying muscular
sensation, which, even without our putting in motion "arms and legs,"
commences its action by force of habit, directly we "will" anything.
Therefore, just as sensations (and indeed many kinds of sensations) are
to be recognized as ingredients of the will, so, in the second place,
thinking is also to be recognized; in every act of the will there is
a ruling thought;--and let us not imagine it possible to sever this
thought from the "willing," as if the will would then remain over!
In the third place, the will is not only a complex of sensation and
thinking, but it is above all an EMOTION, and in fact the emotion of the
command. That which is termed "freedom of the will" is essentially the
emotion of supremacy in respect to him who must obey: "I am free, 'he'
must obey"--this consciousness is inherent in every will; and equally
so the straining of the attention, the straight look which fixes itself
exclusively on one thing, the unconditional judgment that "this and
nothing else is necessary now," the inward certainty that obedience
will be rendered--and whatever else pertains to the position of the
commander. A man who WILLS commands something within himself which
renders obedience, or which he believes renders obedience. But now let
us notice what is the strangest thing about the will,--this affair so
extremely complex, for which the people have only one name. Inasmuch as
in the given circumstances we are at the same time the commanding AND
the obeying parties, and as the obeying party we know the sensations of
constraint, impulsion, pressure, resistance, and motion, which usually
commence immediately after the act of will; inasmuch as, on the other
hand, we are accustomed to disregard this duality, and to deceive
ourselves about it by means of the synthetic term "I": a whole series
of erroneous conclusions, and consequently of false judgments about the
will itself, has become attached to the act of willing--to such a degree
that he who wills believes firmly that willing SUFFICES for action.
Since in the majority of cases there has only been exercise of will
when the effect of the command--consequently obedience, and therefore
action--was to be EXPECTED, the APPEARANCE has translated itself into
the sentiment, as if there were a NECESSITY OF EFFECT; in a word, he who
wills believes with a fair amount of certainty that will and action are
somehow one; he ascribes the success, the carrying out of the willing,
to the will itself, and thereby enjoys an increase of the sensation
of power which accompanies all success. "Freedom of Will"--that is the
expression for the complex state of delight of the person exercising
volition, who commands and at the same time identifies himself with
the executor of the order--who, as such, enjoys also the triumph over
obstacles, but thinks within himself that it was really his own will
that overcame them. In this way the person exercising volition adds the
feelings of delight of his successful executive instruments, the useful
"underwills" or under-souls--indeed, our body is but a social structure
composed of many souls--to his feelings of delight as commander. L'EFFET
C'EST MOI. what happens here is what happens in every well-constructed
and happy commonwealth, namely, that the governing class identifies
itself with the successes of the commonwealth. In all willing it is
absolutely a question of commanding and obeying, on the basis, as
already said, of a social structure composed of many "souls", on which
account a philosopher should claim the right to include willing-as-such
within the sphere of morals--regarded as the doctrine of the relations
of supremacy under which the phenomenon of "life" manifests itself.

20. That the separate philosophical ideas are not anything optional or
autonomously evolving, but grow up in connection and relationship with
each other, that, however suddenly and arbitrarily they seem to appear
in the history of thought, they nevertheless belong just as much to
a system as the collective members of the fauna of a Continent--is
betrayed in the end by the circumstance: how unfailingly the most
diverse philosophers always fill in again a definite fundamental scheme
of POSSIBLE philosophies. Under an invisible spell, they always revolve
once more in the same orbit, however independent of each other they
may feel themselves with their critical or systematic wills, something
within them leads them, something impels them in definite order the
one after the other--to wit, the innate methodology and relationship
of their ideas. Their thinking is, in fact, far less a discovery than a
re-recognizing, a remembering, a return and a home-coming to a far-off,
ancient common-household of the soul, out of which those ideas formerly
grew: philosophizing is so far a kind of atavism of the highest order.
The wonderful family resemblance of all Indian, Greek, and German
philosophizing is easily enough explained. In fact, where there is
affinity of language, owing to the common philosophy of grammar--I mean
owing to the unconscious domination and guidance of similar grammatical
functions--it cannot but be that everything is prepared at the outset
for a similar development and succession of philosophical systems,
just as the way seems barred against certain other possibilities of
world-interpretation. It is highly probable that philosophers within the
domain of the Ural-Altaic languages (where the conception of the subject
is least developed) look otherwise "into the world," and will be
found on paths of thought different from those of the Indo-Germans and
Mussulmans, the spell of certain grammatical functions is ultimately
also the spell of PHYSIOLOGICAL valuations and racial conditions.--So
much by way of rejecting Locke's superficiality with regard to the
origin of ideas.

21. The CAUSA SUI is the best self-contradiction that has yet been
conceived, it is a sort of logical violation and unnaturalness; but the
extravagant pride of man has managed to entangle itself profoundly and
frightfully with this very folly. The desire for "freedom of will"
in the superlative, metaphysical sense, such as still holds sway,
unfortunately, in the minds of the half-educated, the desire to bear
the entire and ultimate responsibility for one's actions oneself, and
to absolve God, the world, ancestors, chance, and society therefrom,
involves nothing less than to be precisely this CAUSA SUI, and, with
more than Munchausen daring, to pull oneself up into existence by the
hair, out of the slough of nothingness. If any one should find out in
this manner the crass stupidity of the celebrated conception of "free
will" and put it out of his head altogether, I beg of him to carry
his "enlightenment" a step further, and also put out of his head the
contrary of this monstrous conception of "free will": I mean "non-free
will," which is tantamount to a misuse of cause and effect. One
should not wrongly MATERIALISE "cause" and "effect," as the natural
philosophers do (and whoever like them naturalize in thinking at
present), according to the prevailing mechanical doltishness which makes
the cause press and push until it "effects" its end; one should use
"cause" and "effect" only as pure CONCEPTIONS, that is to say, as
conventional fictions for the purpose of designation and mutual
understanding,--NOT for explanation. In "being-in-itself" there is
nothing of "casual-connection," of "necessity," or of "psychological
non-freedom"; there the effect does NOT follow the cause, there "law"
does not obtain. It is WE alone who have devised cause, sequence,
reciprocity, relativity, constraint, number, law, freedom, motive,
and purpose; and when we interpret and intermix this symbol-world,
as "being-in-itself," with things, we act once more as we have always
acted--MYTHOLOGICALLY. The "non-free will" is mythology; in real life
it is only a question of STRONG and WEAK wills.--It is almost always
a symptom of what is lacking in himself, when a thinker, in every
"causal-connection" and "psychological necessity," manifests something
of compulsion, indigence, obsequiousness, oppression, and non-freedom;
it is suspicious to have such feelings--the person betrays himself. And
in general, if I have observed correctly, the "non-freedom of the will"
is regarded as a problem from two entirely opposite standpoints, but
always in a profoundly PERSONAL manner: some will not give up their
"responsibility," their belief in THEMSELVES, the personal right to
THEIR merits, at any price (the vain races belong to this class); others
on the contrary, do not wish to be answerable for anything, or blamed
for anything, and owing to an inward self-contempt, seek to GET OUT OF
THE BUSINESS, no matter how. The latter, when they write books, are
in the habit at present of taking the side of criminals; a sort of
socialistic sympathy is their favourite disguise. And as a matter of
fact, the fatalism of the weak-willed embellishes itself surprisingly
when it can pose as "la religion de la souffrance humaine"; that is ITS
"good taste."

22. Let me be pardoned, as an old philologist who cannot desist from
the mischief of putting his finger on bad modes of interpretation, but
"Nature's conformity to law," of which you physicists talk so proudly,
as though--why, it exists only owing to your interpretation and bad
"philology." It is no matter of fact, no "text," but rather just a
naively humanitarian adjustment and perversion of meaning, with which
you make abundant concessions to the democratic instincts of the modern
soul! "Everywhere equality before the law--Nature is not different in
that respect, nor better than we": a fine instance of secret motive,
in which the vulgar antagonism to everything privileged and
autocratic--likewise a second and more refined atheism--is once more
disguised. "Ni dieu, ni maitre"--that, also, is what you want; and
therefore "Cheers for natural law!"--is it not so? But, as has been
said, that is interpretation, not text; and somebody might come along,
who, with opposite intentions and modes of interpretation, could read
out of the same "Nature," and with regard to the same phenomena, just
the tyrannically inconsiderate and relentless enforcement of the claims
of power--an interpreter who should so place the unexceptionalness and
unconditionalness of all "Will to Power" before your eyes, that almost
every word, and the word "tyranny" itself, would eventually seem
unsuitable, or like a weakening and softening metaphor--as being too
human; and who should, nevertheless, end by asserting the same about
this world as you do, namely, that it has a "necessary" and "calculable"
course, NOT, however, because laws obtain in it, but because they are
absolutely LACKING, and every power effects its ultimate consequences
every moment. Granted that this also is only interpretation--and you
will be eager enough to make this objection?--well, so much the better.

23. All psychology hitherto has run aground on moral prejudices and
timidities, it has not dared to launch out into the depths. In so far
as it is allowable to recognize in that which has hitherto been written,
evidence of that which has hitherto been kept silent, it seems as if
nobody had yet harboured the notion of psychology as the Morphology
and DEVELOPMENT-DOCTRINE OF THE WILL TO POWER, as I conceive of it.
The power of moral prejudices has penetrated deeply into the most
intellectual world, the world apparently most indifferent and
unprejudiced, and has obviously operated in an injurious, obstructive,
blinding, and distorting manner. A proper physio-psychology has to
contend with unconscious antagonism in the heart of the investigator,
it has "the heart" against it even a doctrine of the reciprocal
conditionalness of the "good" and the "bad" impulses, causes (as
refined immorality) distress and aversion in a still strong and manly
conscience--still more so, a doctrine of the derivation of all good
impulses from bad ones. If, however, a person should regard even
the emotions of hatred, envy, covetousness, and imperiousness
as life-conditioning emotions, as factors which must be present,
fundamentally and essentially, in the general economy of life (which
must, therefore, be further developed if life is to be further
developed), he will suffer from such a view of things as from
sea-sickness. And yet this hypothesis is far from being the strangest
and most painful in this immense and almost new domain of dangerous
knowledge, and there are in fact a hundred good reasons why every one
should keep away from it who CAN do so! On the other hand, if one has
once drifted hither with one's bark, well! very good! now let us set our
teeth firmly! let us open our eyes and keep our hand fast on the helm!
We sail away right OVER morality, we crush out, we destroy perhaps the
remains of our own morality by daring to make our voyage thither--but
what do WE matter. Never yet did a PROFOUNDER world of insight reveal
itself to daring travelers and adventurers, and the psychologist who
thus "makes a sacrifice"--it is not the sacrifizio dell' intelletto,
on the contrary!--will at least be entitled to demand in return that
psychology shall once more be recognized as the queen of the sciences,
for whose service and equipment the other sciences exist. For psychology
is once more the path to the fundamental problems.



CHAPTER II. THE FREE SPIRIT


24. O sancta simplicitas! In what strange simplification and
falsification man lives! One can never cease wondering when once one has
got eyes for beholding this marvel! How we have made everything around
us clear and free and easy and simple! how we have been able to give
our senses a passport to everything superficial, our thoughts a godlike
desire for wanton pranks and wrong inferences!--how from the beginning,
we have contrived to retain our ignorance in order to enjoy an almost
inconceivable freedom, thoughtlessness, imprudence, heartiness,
and gaiety--in order to enjoy life! And only on this solidified,
granite-like foundation of ignorance could knowledge rear itself
hitherto, the will to knowledge on the foundation of a far more powerful
will, the will to ignorance, to the uncertain, to the untrue! Not as
its opposite, but--as its refinement! It is to be hoped, indeed, that
LANGUAGE, here as elsewhere, will not get over its awkwardness, and that
it will continue to talk of opposites where there are only degrees
and many refinements of gradation; it is equally to be hoped that the
incarnated Tartuffery of morals, which now belongs to our unconquerable
"flesh and blood," will turn the words round in the mouths of us
discerning ones. Here and there we understand it, and laugh at the way
in which precisely the best knowledge seeks most to retain us in this
SIMPLIFIED, thoroughly artificial, suitably imagined, and suitably
falsified world: at the way in which, whether it will or not, it loves
error, because, as living itself, it loves life!

25. After such a cheerful commencement, a serious word would fain be
heard; it appeals to the most serious minds. Take care, ye philosophers
and friends of knowledge, and beware of martyrdom! Of suffering "for the
truth's sake"! even in your own defense! It spoils all the innocence
and fine neutrality of your conscience; it makes you headstrong against
objections and red rags; it stupefies, animalizes, and brutalizes, when
in the struggle with danger, slander, suspicion, expulsion, and even
worse consequences of enmity, ye have at last to play your last card
as protectors of truth upon earth--as though "the Truth" were such an
innocent and incompetent creature as to require protectors! and you of
all people, ye knights of the sorrowful countenance, Messrs Loafers and
Cobweb-spinners of the spirit! Finally, ye know sufficiently well that
it cannot be of any consequence if YE just carry your point; ye know
that hitherto no philosopher has carried his point, and that there might
be a more laudable truthfulness in every little interrogative mark
which you place after your special words and favourite doctrines (and
occasionally after yourselves) than in all the solemn pantomime and
trumping games before accusers and law-courts! Rather go out of the way!
Flee into concealment! And have your masks and your ruses, that ye may
be mistaken for what you are, or somewhat feared! And pray, don't forget
the garden, the garden with golden trellis-work! And have people around
you who are as a garden--or as music on the waters at eventide, when
already the day becomes a memory. Choose the GOOD solitude, the free,
wanton, lightsome solitude, which also gives you the right still to
remain good in any sense whatsoever! How poisonous, how crafty, how bad,
does every long war make one, which cannot be waged openly by means
of force! How PERSONAL does a long fear make one, a long watching
of enemies, of possible enemies! These pariahs of society, these
long-pursued, badly-persecuted ones--also the compulsory recluses, the
Spinozas or Giordano Brunos--always become in the end, even under the
most intellectual masquerade, and perhaps without being themselves aware
of it, refined vengeance-seekers and poison-Brewers (just lay bare
the foundation of Spinoza's ethics and theology!), not to speak of
the stupidity of moral indignation, which is the unfailing sign in a
philosopher that the sense of philosophical humour has left him. The
martyrdom of the philosopher, his "sacrifice for the sake of truth,"
forces into the light whatever of the agitator and actor lurks in him;
and if one has hitherto contemplated him only with artistic curiosity,
with regard to many a philosopher it is easy to understand the dangerous
desire to see him also in his deterioration (deteriorated into a
"martyr," into a stage-and-tribune-bawler). Only, that it is necessary
with such a desire to be clear WHAT spectacle one will see in any
case--merely a satyric play, merely an epilogue farce, merely the
continued proof that the long, real tragedy IS AT AN END, supposing that
every philosophy has been a long tragedy in its origin.

26. Every select man strives instinctively for a citadel and a privacy,
where he is FREE from the crowd, the many, the majority--where he may
forget "men who are the rule," as their exception;--exclusive only of
the case in which he is pushed straight to such men by a still stronger
instinct, as a discerner in the great and exceptional sense. Whoever, in
intercourse with men, does not occasionally glisten in all the green
and grey colours of distress, owing to disgust, satiety, sympathy,
gloominess, and solitariness, is assuredly not a man of elevated tastes;
supposing, however, that he does not voluntarily take all this burden
and disgust upon himself, that he persistently avoids it, and remains,
as I said, quietly and proudly hidden in his citadel, one thing is then
certain: he was not made, he was not predestined for knowledge. For as
such, he would one day have to say to himself: "The devil take my good
taste! but 'the rule' is more interesting than the exception--than
myself, the exception!" And he would go DOWN, and above all, he would
go "inside." The long and serious study of the AVERAGE man--and
consequently much disguise, self-overcoming, familiarity, and bad
intercourse (all intercourse is bad intercourse except with one's
equals):--that constitutes a necessary part of the life-history of every
philosopher; perhaps the most disagreeable, odious, and disappointing
part. If he is fortunate, however, as a favourite child of knowledge
should be, he will meet with suitable auxiliaries who will shorten and
lighten his task; I mean so-called cynics, those who simply recognize
the animal, the commonplace and "the rule" in themselves, and at the
same time have so much spirituality and ticklishness as to make them
talk of themselves and their like BEFORE WITNESSES--sometimes they
wallow, even in books, as on their own dung-hill. Cynicism is the only
form in which base souls approach what is called honesty; and the
higher man must open his ears to all the coarser or finer cynicism, and
congratulate himself when the clown becomes shameless right before
him, or the scientific satyr speaks out. There are even cases where
enchantment mixes with the disgust--namely, where by a freak of nature,
genius is bound to some such indiscreet billy-goat and ape, as in the
case of the Abbe Galiani, the profoundest, acutest, and perhaps also
filthiest man of his century--he was far profounder than Voltaire, and
consequently also, a good deal more silent. It happens more frequently,
as has been hinted, that a scientific head is placed on an ape's body, a
fine exceptional understanding in a base soul, an occurrence by no means
rare, especially among doctors and moral physiologists. And whenever
anyone speaks without bitterness, or rather quite innocently, of man
as a belly with two requirements, and a head with one; whenever any one
sees, seeks, and WANTS to see only hunger, sexual instinct, and vanity
as the real and only motives of human actions; in short, when any one
speaks "badly"--and not even "ill"--of man, then ought the lover of
knowledge to hearken attentively and diligently; he ought, in general,
to have an open ear wherever there is talk without indignation. For the
indignant man, and he who perpetually tears and lacerates himself with
his own teeth (or, in place of himself, the world, God, or society),
may indeed, morally speaking, stand higher than the laughing and
self-satisfied satyr, but in every other sense he is the more ordinary,
more indifferent, and less instructive case. And no one is such a LIAR
as the indignant man.

27. It is difficult to be understood, especially when one thinks and
lives gangasrotogati [Footnote: Like the river Ganges: presto.] among
those only who think and live otherwise--namely, kurmagati [Footnote:
Like the tortoise: lento.], or at best "froglike," mandeikagati
[Footnote: Like the frog: staccato.] (I do everything to be "difficultly
understood" myself!)--and one should be heartily grateful for the
good will to some refinement of interpretation. As regards "the good
friends," however, who are always too easy-going, and think that as
friends they have a right to ease, one does well at the very first to
grant them a play-ground and romping-place for misunderstanding--one can
thus laugh still; or get rid of them altogether, these good friends--and
laugh then also!

28. What is most difficult to render from one language into another
is the TEMPO of its style, which has its basis in the character of the
race, or to speak more physiologically, in the average TEMPO of the
assimilation of its nutriment. There are honestly meant translations,
which, as involuntary vulgarizations, are almost falsifications of the
original, merely because its lively and merry TEMPO (which overleaps and
obviates all dangers in word and expression) could not also be
rendered. A German is almost incapacitated for PRESTO in his language;
consequently also, as may be reasonably inferred, for many of the most
delightful and daring NUANCES of free, free-spirited thought. And just
as the buffoon and satyr are foreign to him in body and conscience,
so Aristophanes and Petronius are untranslatable for him. Everything
ponderous, viscous, and pompously clumsy, all long-winded and wearying
species of style, are developed in profuse variety among Germans--pardon
me for stating the fact that even Goethe's prose, in its mixture of
stiffness and elegance, is no exception, as a reflection of the "good
old time" to which it belongs, and as an expression of German taste at a
time when there was still a "German taste," which was a rococo-taste
in moribus et artibus. Lessing is an exception, owing to his histrionic
nature, which understood much, and was versed in many things; he who was
not the translator of Bayle to no purpose, who took refuge willingly in
the shadow of Diderot and Voltaire, and still more willingly among the
Roman comedy-writers--Lessing loved also free-spiritism in the TEMPO,
and flight out of Germany. But how could the German language, even
in the prose of Lessing, imitate the TEMPO of Machiavelli, who in his
"Principe" makes us breathe the dry, fine air of Florence, and cannot
help presenting the most serious events in a boisterous allegrissimo,
perhaps not without a malicious artistic sense of the contrast he
ventures to present--long, heavy, difficult, dangerous thoughts, and
a TEMPO of the gallop, and of the best, wantonest humour? Finally, who
would venture on a German translation of Petronius, who, more than any
great musician hitherto, was a master of PRESTO in invention, ideas, and
words? What matter in the end about the swamps of the sick, evil world,
or of the "ancient world," when like him, one has the feet of a wind,
the rush, the breath, the emancipating scorn of a wind, which makes
everything healthy, by making everything RUN! And with regard to
Aristophanes--that transfiguring, complementary genius, for whose
sake one PARDONS all Hellenism for having existed, provided one has
understood in its full profundity ALL that there requires pardon and
transfiguration; there is nothing that has caused me to meditate more on
PLATO'S secrecy and sphinx-like nature, than the happily preserved petit
fait that under the pillow of his death-bed there was found no
"Bible," nor anything Egyptian, Pythagorean, or Platonic--but a book of
Aristophanes. How could even Plato have endured life--a Greek life which
he repudiated--without an Aristophanes!

29. It is the business of the very few to be independent; it is a
privilege of the strong. And whoever attempts it, even with the best
right, but without being OBLIGED to do so, proves that he is probably
not only strong, but also daring beyond measure. He enters into a
labyrinth, he multiplies a thousandfold the dangers which life in itself
already brings with it; not the least of which is that no one can see
how and where he loses his way, becomes isolated, and is torn piecemeal
by some minotaur of conscience. Supposing such a one comes to grief, it
is so far from the comprehension of men that they neither feel it, nor
sympathize with it. And he cannot any longer go back! He cannot even go
back again to the sympathy of men!

30. Our deepest insights must--and should--appear as follies, and under
certain circumstances as crimes, when they come unauthorizedly to
the ears of those who are not disposed and predestined for them. The
exoteric and the esoteric, as they were formerly distinguished by
philosophers--among the Indians, as among the Greeks, Persians, and
Mussulmans, in short, wherever people believed in gradations of rank and
NOT in equality and equal rights--are not so much in contradistinction
to one another in respect to the exoteric class, standing without, and
viewing, estimating, measuring, and judging from the outside, and not
from the inside; the more essential distinction is that the class in
question views things from below upwards--while the esoteric class views
things FROM ABOVE DOWNWARDS. There are heights of the soul from which
tragedy itself no longer appears to operate tragically; and if all the
woe in the world were taken together, who would dare to decide whether
the sight of it would NECESSARILY seduce and constrain to sympathy, and
thus to a doubling of the woe?... That which serves the higher class of
men for nourishment or refreshment, must be almost poison to an entirely
different and lower order of human beings. The virtues of the common
man would perhaps mean vice and weakness in a philosopher; it might be
possible for a highly developed man, supposing him to degenerate and go
to ruin, to acquire qualities thereby alone, for the sake of which he
would have to be honoured as a saint in the lower world into which he
had sunk. There are books which have an inverse value for the soul and
the health according as the inferior soul and the lower vitality, or the
higher and more powerful, make use of them. In the former case they are
dangerous, disturbing, unsettling books, in the latter case they are
herald-calls which summon the bravest to THEIR bravery. Books for the
general reader are always ill-smelling books, the odour of paltry people
clings to them. Where the populace eat and drink, and even where they
reverence, it is accustomed to stink. One should not go into churches if
one wishes to breathe PURE air.

31. In our youthful years we still venerate and despise without the art
of NUANCE, which is the best gain of life, and we have rightly to do
hard penance for having fallen upon men and things with Yea and Nay.
Everything is so arranged that the worst of all tastes, THE TASTE FOR
THE UNCONDITIONAL, is cruelly befooled and abused, until a man learns
to introduce a little art into his sentiments, and prefers to try
conclusions with the artificial, as do the real artists of life. The
angry and reverent spirit peculiar to youth appears to allow itself no
peace, until it has suitably falsified men and things, to be able
to vent its passion upon them: youth in itself even, is something
falsifying and deceptive. Later on, when the young soul, tortured by
continual disillusions, finally turns suspiciously against itself--still
ardent and savage even in its suspicion and remorse of conscience: how
it upbraids itself, how impatiently it tears itself, how it revenges
itself for its long self-blinding, as though it had been a voluntary
blindness! In this transition one punishes oneself by distrust of one's
sentiments; one tortures one's enthusiasm with doubt, one feels even the
good conscience to be a danger, as if it were the self-concealment and
lassitude of a more refined uprightness; and above all, one espouses
upon principle the cause AGAINST "youth."--A decade later, and one
comprehends that all this was also still--youth!

32. Throughout the longest period of human history--one calls it the
prehistoric period--the value or non-value of an action was inferred
from its CONSEQUENCES; the action in itself was not taken into
consideration, any more than its origin; but pretty much as in China at
present, where the distinction or disgrace of a child redounds to
its parents, the retro-operating power of success or failure was what
induced men to think well or ill of an action. Let us call this period
the PRE-MORAL period of mankind; the imperative, "Know thyself!" was
then still unknown.--In the last ten thousand years, on the other hand,
on certain large portions of the earth, one has gradually got so far,
that one no longer lets the consequences of an action, but its origin,
decide with regard to its worth: a great achievement as a whole, an
important refinement of vision and of criterion, the unconscious effect
of the supremacy of aristocratic values and of the belief in "origin,"
the mark of a period which may be designated in the narrower sense as
the MORAL one: the first attempt at self-knowledge is thereby
made. Instead of the consequences, the origin--what an inversion
of perspective! And assuredly an inversion effected only after long
struggle and wavering! To be sure, an ominous new superstition, a
peculiar narrowness of interpretation, attained supremacy precisely
thereby: the origin of an action was interpreted in the most definite
sense possible, as origin out of an INTENTION; people were agreed in the
belief that the value of an action lay in the value of its intention.
The intention as the sole origin and antecedent history of an action:
under the influence of this prejudice moral praise and blame have been
bestowed, and men have judged and even philosophized almost up to the
present day.--Is it not possible, however, that the necessity may now
have arisen of again making up our minds with regard to the reversing
and fundamental shifting of values, owing to a new self-consciousness
and acuteness in man--is it not possible that we may be standing on
the threshold of a period which to begin with, would be distinguished
negatively as ULTRA-MORAL: nowadays when, at least among us immoralists,
the suspicion arises that the decisive value of an action lies precisely
in that which is NOT INTENTIONAL, and that all its intentionalness, all
that is seen, sensible, or "sensed" in it, belongs to its surface or
skin--which, like every skin, betrays something, but CONCEALS still
more? In short, we believe that the intention is only a sign or symptom,
which first requires an explanation--a sign, moreover, which has too
many interpretations, and consequently hardly any meaning in itself
alone: that morality, in the sense in which it has been understood
hitherto, as intention-morality, has been a prejudice, perhaps a
prematureness or preliminariness, probably something of the same rank
as astrology and alchemy, but in any case something which must be
surmounted. The surmounting of morality, in a certain sense even the
self-mounting of morality--let that be the name for the long-secret
labour which has been reserved for the most refined, the most upright,
and also the most wicked consciences of today, as the living touchstones
of the soul.

33. It cannot be helped: the sentiment of surrender, of sacrifice for
one's neighbour, and all self-renunciation-morality, must be mercilessly
called to account, and brought to judgment; just as the aesthetics
of "disinterested contemplation," under which the emasculation of art
nowadays seeks insidiously enough to create itself a good conscience.
There is far too much witchery and sugar in the sentiments "for others"
and "NOT for myself," for one not needing to be doubly distrustful here,
and for one asking promptly: "Are they not perhaps--DECEPTIONS?"--That
they PLEASE--him who has them, and him who enjoys their fruit, and also
the mere spectator--that is still no argument in their FAVOUR, but just
calls for caution. Let us therefore be cautious!

34. At whatever standpoint of philosophy one may place oneself nowadays,
seen from every position, the ERRONEOUSNESS of the world in which we
think we live is the surest and most certain thing our eyes can light
upon: we find proof after proof thereof, which would fain allure us into
surmises concerning a deceptive principle in the "nature of things."
He, however, who makes thinking itself, and consequently "the spirit,"
responsible for the falseness of the world--an honourable exit, which
every conscious or unconscious advocatus dei avails himself of--he
who regards this world, including space, time, form, and movement, as
falsely DEDUCED, would have at least good reason in the end to become
distrustful also of all thinking; has it not hitherto been playing upon
us the worst of scurvy tricks? and what guarantee would it give that
it would not continue to do what it has always been doing? In all
seriousness, the innocence of thinkers has something touching and
respect-inspiring in it, which even nowadays permits them to wait upon
consciousness with the request that it will give them HONEST answers:
for example, whether it be "real" or not, and why it keeps the outer
world so resolutely at a distance, and other questions of the same
description. The belief in "immediate certainties" is a MORAL NAIVETE
which does honour to us philosophers; but--we have now to cease being
"MERELY moral" men! Apart from morality, such belief is a folly which
does little honour to us! If in middle-class life an ever-ready distrust
is regarded as the sign of a "bad character," and consequently as an
imprudence, here among us, beyond the middle-class world and its Yeas
and Nays, what should prevent our being imprudent and saying: the
philosopher has at length a RIGHT to "bad character," as the being who
has hitherto been most befooled on earth--he is now under OBLIGATION
to distrustfulness, to the wickedest squinting out of every abyss of
suspicion.--Forgive me the joke of this gloomy grimace and turn of
expression; for I myself have long ago learned to think and estimate
differently with regard to deceiving and being deceived, and I keep at
least a couple of pokes in the ribs ready for the blind rage with which
philosophers struggle against being deceived. Why NOT? It is nothing
more than a moral prejudice that truth is worth more than semblance; it
is, in fact, the worst proved supposition in the world. So much must be
conceded: there could have been no life at all except upon the basis
of perspective estimates and semblances; and if, with the virtuous
enthusiasm and stupidity of many philosophers, one wished to do away
altogether with the "seeming world"--well, granted that YOU could do
that,--at least nothing of your "truth" would thereby remain! Indeed,
what is it that forces us in general to the supposition that there is an
essential opposition of "true" and "false"? Is it not enough to suppose
degrees of seemingness, and as it were lighter and darker shades and
tones of semblance--different valeurs, as the painters say? Why might
not the world WHICH CONCERNS US--be a fiction? And to any one who
suggested: "But to a fiction belongs an originator?"--might it not be
bluntly replied: WHY? May not this "belong" also belong to the fiction?
Is it not at length permitted to be a little ironical towards the
subject, just as towards the predicate and object? Might not the
philosopher elevate himself above faith in grammar? All respect
to governesses, but is it not time that philosophy should renounce
governess-faith?

35. O Voltaire! O humanity! O idiocy! There is something ticklish in
"the truth," and in the SEARCH for the truth; and if man goes about it
too humanely--"il ne cherche le vrai que pour faire le bien"--I wager he
finds nothing!

36. Supposing that nothing else is "given" as real but our world of
desires and passions, that we cannot sink or rise to any other "reality"
but just that of our impulses--for thinking is only a relation of these
impulses to one another:--are we not permitted to make the attempt and
to ask the question whether this which is "given" does not SUFFICE, by
means of our counterparts, for the understanding even of the so-called
mechanical (or "material") world? I do not mean as an illusion, a
"semblance," a "representation" (in the Berkeleyan and Schopenhauerian
sense), but as possessing the same degree of reality as our emotions
themselves--as a more primitive form of the world of emotions, in
which everything still lies locked in a mighty unity, which afterwards
branches off and develops itself in organic processes (naturally also,
refines and debilitates)--as a kind of instinctive life in which all
organic functions, including self-regulation, assimilation, nutrition,
secretion, and change of matter, are still synthetically united with
one another--as a PRIMARY FORM of life?--In the end, it is not only
permitted to make this attempt, it is commanded by the conscience of
LOGICAL METHOD. Not to assume several kinds of causality, so long as
the attempt to get along with a single one has not been pushed to its
furthest extent (to absurdity, if I may be allowed to say so): that is
a morality of method which one may not repudiate nowadays--it follows
"from its definition," as mathematicians say. The question is ultimately
whether we really recognize the will as OPERATING, whether we believe in
the causality of the will; if we do so--and fundamentally our belief IN
THIS is just our belief in causality itself--we MUST make the attempt
to posit hypothetically the causality of the will as the only causality.
"Will" can naturally only operate on "will"--and not on "matter" (not
on "nerves," for instance): in short, the hypothesis must be
hazarded, whether will does not operate on will wherever "effects"
are recognized--and whether all mechanical action, inasmuch as a power
operates therein, is not just the power of will, the effect of will.
Granted, finally, that we succeeded in explaining our entire instinctive
life as the development and ramification of one fundamental form of
will--namely, the Will to Power, as my thesis puts it; granted that all
organic functions could be traced back to this Will to Power, and that
the solution of the problem of generation and nutrition--it is one
problem--could also be found therein: one would thus have acquired the
right to define ALL active force unequivocally as WILL TO POWER. The
world seen from within, the world defined and designated according to
its "intelligible character"--it would simply be "Will to Power," and
nothing else.

37. "What? Does not that mean in popular language: God is disproved, but
not the devil?"--On the contrary! On the contrary, my friends! And who
the devil also compels you to speak popularly!

38. As happened finally in all the enlightenment of modern times with
the French Revolution (that terrible farce, quite superfluous when
judged close at hand, into which, however, the noble and visionary
spectators of all Europe have interpreted from a distance their own
indignation and enthusiasm so long and passionately, UNTIL THE TEXT HAS
DISAPPEARED UNDER THE INTERPRETATION), so a noble posterity might once
more misunderstand the whole of the past, and perhaps only thereby make
ITS aspect endurable.--Or rather, has not this already happened? Have
not we ourselves been--that "noble posterity"? And, in so far as we now
comprehend this, is it not--thereby already past?

39. Nobody will very readily regard a doctrine as true merely because
it makes people happy or virtuous--excepting, perhaps, the amiable
"Idealists," who are enthusiastic about the good, true, and beautiful,
and let all kinds of motley, coarse, and good-natured desirabilities
swim about promiscuously in their pond. Happiness and virtue are no
arguments. It is willingly forgotten, however, even on the part of
thoughtful minds, that to make unhappy and to make bad are just as
little counter-arguments. A thing could be TRUE, although it were in
the highest degree injurious and dangerous; indeed, the fundamental
constitution of existence might be such that one succumbed by a full
knowledge of it--so that the strength of a mind might be measured by
the amount of "truth" it could endure--or to speak more plainly, by the
extent to which it REQUIRED truth attenuated, veiled, sweetened, damped,
and falsified. But there is no doubt that for the discovery of certain
PORTIONS of truth the wicked and unfortunate are more favourably
situated and have a greater likelihood of success; not to speak of the
wicked who are happy--a species about whom moralists are silent. Perhaps
severity and craft are more favourable conditions for the development of
strong, independent spirits and philosophers than the gentle, refined,
yielding good-nature, and habit of taking things easily, which are
prized, and rightly prized in a learned man. Presupposing always,
to begin with, that the term "philosopher" be not confined to the
philosopher who writes books, or even introduces HIS philosophy into
books!--Stendhal furnishes a last feature of the portrait of the
free-spirited philosopher, which for the sake of German taste I will
not omit to underline--for it is OPPOSED to German taste. "Pour etre
bon philosophe," says this last great psychologist, "il faut etre sec,
clair, sans illusion. Un banquier, qui a fait fortune, a une partie du
caractere requis pour faire des decouvertes en philosophie, c'est-a-dire
pour voir clair dans ce qui est."

40. Everything that is profound loves the mask: the profoundest things
have a hatred even of figure and likeness. Should not the CONTRARY only
be the right disguise for the shame of a God to go about in? A question
worth asking!--it would be strange if some mystic has not already
ventured on the same kind of thing. There are proceedings of such a
delicate nature that it is well to overwhelm them with coarseness
and make them unrecognizable; there are actions of love and of an
extravagant magnanimity after which nothing can be wiser than to take
a stick and thrash the witness soundly: one thereby obscures his
recollection. Many a one is able to obscure and abuse his own memory, in
order at least to have vengeance on this sole party in the secret:
shame is inventive. They are not the worst things of which one is
most ashamed: there is not only deceit behind a mask--there is so much
goodness in craft. I could imagine that a man with something costly and
fragile to conceal, would roll through life clumsily and rotundly like
an old, green, heavily-hooped wine-cask: the refinement of his shame
requiring it to be so. A man who has depths in his shame meets his
destiny and his delicate decisions upon paths which few ever reach,
and with regard to the existence of which his nearest and most intimate
friends may be ignorant; his mortal danger conceals itself from their
eyes, and equally so his regained security. Such a hidden nature,
which instinctively employs speech for silence and concealment, and is
inexhaustible in evasion of communication, DESIRES and insists that a
mask of himself shall occupy his place in the hearts and heads of his
friends; and supposing he does not desire it, his eyes will some day be
opened to the fact that there is nevertheless a mask of him there--and
that it is well to be so. Every profound spirit needs a mask; nay, more,
around every profound spirit there continually grows a mask, owing to
the constantly false, that is to say, SUPERFICIAL interpretation
of every word he utters, every step he takes, every sign of life he
manifests.

41. One must subject oneself to one's own tests that one is destined
for independence and command, and do so at the right time. One must not
avoid one's tests, although they constitute perhaps the most dangerous
game one can play, and are in the end tests made only before ourselves
and before no other judge. Not to cleave to any person, be it even the
dearest--every person is a prison and also a recess. Not to cleave to
a fatherland, be it even the most suffering and necessitous--it is even
less difficult to detach one's heart from a victorious fatherland. Not
to cleave to a sympathy, be it even for higher men, into whose peculiar
torture and helplessness chance has given us an insight. Not to cleave
to a science, though it tempt one with the most valuable discoveries,
apparently specially reserved for us. Not to cleave to one's own
liberation, to the voluptuous distance and remoteness of the bird, which
always flies further aloft in order always to see more under it--the
danger of the flier. Not to cleave to our own virtues, nor become as
a whole a victim to any of our specialties, to our "hospitality" for
instance, which is the danger of dangers for highly developed
and wealthy souls, who deal prodigally, almost indifferently with
themselves, and push the virtue of liberality so far that it becomes
a vice. One must know how TO CONSERVE ONESELF--the best test of
independence.

42. A new order of philosophers is appearing; I shall venture to baptize
them by a name not without danger. As far as I understand them, as far
as they allow themselves to be understood--for it is their nature to
WISH to remain something of a puzzle--these philosophers of the
future might rightly, perhaps also wrongly, claim to be designated as
"tempters." This name itself is after all only an attempt, or, if it be
preferred, a temptation.

43. Will they be new friends of "truth," these coming philosophers? Very
probably, for all philosophers hitherto have loved their truths. But
assuredly they will not be dogmatists. It must be contrary to their
pride, and also contrary to their taste, that their truth should still
be truth for every one--that which has hitherto been the secret wish
and ultimate purpose of all dogmatic efforts. "My opinion is MY opinion:
another person has not easily a right to it"--such a philosopher of the
future will say, perhaps. One must renounce the bad taste of wishing to
agree with many people. "Good" is no longer good when one's neighbour
takes it into his mouth. And how could there be a "common good"! The
expression contradicts itself; that which can be common is always of
small value. In the end things must be as they are and have always
been--the great things remain for the great, the abysses for the
profound, the delicacies and thrills for the refined, and, to sum up
shortly, everything rare for the rare.


44. Need I say expressly after all this that they will be free, VERY
free spirits, these philosophers of the future--as certainly also they
will not be merely free spirits, but something more, higher, greater,
and fundamentally different, which does not wish to be misunderstood and
mistaken? But while I say this, I feel under OBLIGATION almost as much
to them as to ourselves (we free spirits who are their heralds and
forerunners), to sweep away from ourselves altogether a stupid old
prejudice and misunderstanding, which, like a fog, has too long made the
conception of "free spirit" obscure. In every country of Europe, and the
same in America, there is at present something which makes an abuse of
this name a very narrow, prepossessed, enchained class of spirits,
who desire almost the opposite of what our intentions and instincts
prompt--not to mention that in respect to the NEW philosophers who are
appearing, they must still more be closed windows and bolted doors.
Briefly and regrettably, they belong to the LEVELLERS, these wrongly
named "free spirits"--as glib-tongued and scribe-fingered slaves of
the democratic taste and its "modern ideas" all of them men without
solitude, without personal solitude, blunt honest fellows to whom
neither courage nor honourable conduct ought to be denied, only, they
are not free, and are ludicrously superficial, especially in their
innate partiality for seeing the cause of almost ALL human misery and
failure in the old forms in which society has hitherto existed--a notion
which happily inverts the truth entirely! What they would fain attain
with all their strength, is the universal, green-meadow happiness of the
herd, together with security, safety, comfort, and alleviation of life
for every one, their two most frequently chanted songs and doctrines
are called "Equality of Rights" and "Sympathy with All Sufferers"--and
suffering itself is looked upon by them as something which must be
DONE AWAY WITH. We opposite ones, however, who have opened our eye and
conscience to the question how and where the plant "man" has hitherto
grown most vigorously, believe that this has always taken place under
the opposite conditions, that for this end the dangerousness of his
situation had to be increased enormously, his inventive faculty and
dissembling power (his "spirit") had to develop into subtlety and daring
under long oppression and compulsion, and his Will to Life had to be
increased to the unconditioned Will to Power--we believe that severity,
violence, slavery, danger in the street and in the heart, secrecy,
stoicism, tempter's art and devilry of every kind,--that everything
wicked, terrible, tyrannical, predatory, and serpentine in man, serves
as well for the elevation of the human species as its opposite--we do
not even say enough when we only say THIS MUCH, and in any case we
find ourselves here, both with our speech and our silence, at the OTHER
extreme of all modern ideology and gregarious desirability, as their
antipodes perhaps? What wonder that we "free spirits" are not exactly
the most communicative spirits? that we do not wish to betray in every
respect WHAT a spirit can free itself from, and WHERE perhaps it will
then be driven? And as to the import of the dangerous formula, "Beyond
Good and Evil," with which we at least avoid confusion, we ARE something
else than "libres-penseurs," "liben pensatori" "free-thinkers,"
and whatever these honest advocates of "modern ideas" like to call
themselves. Having been at home, or at least guests, in many realms of
the spirit, having escaped again and again from the gloomy, agreeable
nooks in which preferences and prejudices, youth, origin, the accident
of men and books, or even the weariness of travel seemed to confine us,
full of malice against the seductions of dependency which he concealed
in honours, money, positions, or exaltation of the senses, grateful even
for distress and the vicissitudes of illness, because they always free
us from some rule, and its "prejudice," grateful to the God, devil,
sheep, and worm in us, inquisitive to a fault, investigators to the
point of cruelty, with unhesitating fingers for the intangible, with
teeth and stomachs for the most indigestible, ready for any business
that requires sagacity and acute senses, ready for every adventure,
owing to an excess of "free will", with anterior and posterior souls,
into the ultimate intentions of which it is difficult to pry, with
foregrounds and backgrounds to the end of which no foot may run, hidden
ones under the mantles of light, appropriators, although we resemble
heirs and spendthrifts, arrangers and collectors from morning till
night, misers of our wealth and our full-crammed drawers, economical
in learning and forgetting, inventive in scheming, sometimes proud of
tables of categories, sometimes pedants, sometimes night-owls of
work even in full day, yea, if necessary, even scarecrows--and it is
necessary nowadays, that is to say, inasmuch as we are the born, sworn,
jealous friends of SOLITUDE, of our own profoundest midnight and midday
solitude--such kind of men are we, we free spirits! And perhaps ye are
also something of the same kind, ye coming ones? ye NEW philosophers?



CHAPTER III. THE RELIGIOUS MOOD


45. The human soul and its limits, the range of man's inner experiences
hitherto attained, the heights, depths, and distances of these
experiences, the entire history of the soul UP TO THE PRESENT TIME,
and its still unexhausted possibilities: this is the preordained
hunting-domain for a born psychologist and lover of a "big hunt". But
how often must he say despairingly to himself: "A single individual!
alas, only a single individual! and this great forest, this virgin
forest!" So he would like to have some hundreds of hunting assistants,
and fine trained hounds, that he could send into the history of the
human soul, to drive HIS game together. In vain: again and again he
experiences, profoundly and bitterly, how difficult it is to find
assistants and dogs for all the things that directly excite his
curiosity. The evil of sending scholars into new and dangerous
hunting-domains, where courage, sagacity, and subtlety in every sense
are required, is that they are no longer serviceable just when the "BIG
hunt," and also the great danger commences,--it is precisely then that
they lose their keen eye and nose. In order, for instance, to divine and
determine what sort of history the problem of KNOWLEDGE AND CONSCIENCE
has hitherto had in the souls of homines religiosi, a person would
perhaps himself have to possess as profound, as bruised, as immense an
experience as the intellectual conscience of Pascal; and then he would
still require that wide-spread heaven of clear, wicked spirituality,
which, from above, would be able to oversee, arrange, and effectively
formulize this mass of dangerous and painful experiences.--But who
could do me this service! And who would have time to wait for such
servants!--they evidently appear too rarely, they are so improbable at
all times! Eventually one must do everything ONESELF in order to know
something; which means that one has MUCH to do!--But a curiosity like
mine is once for all the most agreeable of vices--pardon me! I mean to
say that the love of truth has its reward in heaven, and already upon
earth.

46. Faith, such as early Christianity desired, and not infrequently
achieved in the midst of a skeptical and southernly free-spirited world,
which had centuries of struggle between philosophical schools behind
it and in it, counting besides the education in tolerance which
the Imperium Romanum gave--this faith is NOT that sincere, austere
slave-faith by which perhaps a Luther or a Cromwell, or some other
northern barbarian of the spirit remained attached to his God and
Christianity, it is much rather the faith of Pascal, which resembles in
a terrible manner a continuous suicide of reason--a tough, long-lived,
worm-like reason, which is not to be slain at once and with a single
blow. The Christian faith from the beginning, is sacrifice the sacrifice
of all freedom, all pride, all self-confidence of spirit, it is at
the same time subjection, self-derision, and self-mutilation. There is
cruelty and religious Phoenicianism in this faith, which is adapted to a
tender, many-sided, and very fastidious conscience, it takes for granted
that the subjection of the spirit is indescribably PAINFUL, that all the
past and all the habits of such a spirit resist the absurdissimum, in
the form of which "faith" comes to it. Modern men, with their obtuseness
as regards all Christian nomenclature, have no longer the sense for the
terribly superlative conception which was implied to an antique taste by
the paradox of the formula, "God on the Cross". Hitherto there had never
and nowhere been such boldness in inversion, nor anything at once so
dreadful, questioning, and questionable as this formula: it promised a
transvaluation of all ancient values--It was the Orient, the PROFOUND
Orient, it was the Oriental slave who thus took revenge on Rome and its
noble, light-minded toleration, on the Roman "Catholicism" of non-faith,
and it was always not the faith, but the freedom from the faith, the
half-stoical and smiling indifference to the seriousness of the faith,
which made the slaves indignant at their masters and revolt against
them. "Enlightenment" causes revolt, for the slave desires the
unconditioned, he understands nothing but the tyrannous, even in morals,
he loves as he hates, without NUANCE, to the very depths, to the point
of pain, to the point of sickness--his many HIDDEN sufferings make
him revolt against the noble taste which seems to DENY suffering. The
skepticism with regard to suffering, fundamentally only an attitude of
aristocratic morality, was not the least of the causes, also, of the
last great slave-insurrection which began with the French Revolution.

47. Wherever the religious neurosis has appeared on the earth so far,
we find it connected with three dangerous prescriptions as to regimen:
solitude, fasting, and sexual abstinence--but without its being possible
to determine with certainty which is cause and which is effect, or IF
any relation at all of cause and effect exists there. This latter doubt
is justified by the fact that one of the most regular symptoms among
savage as well as among civilized peoples is the most sudden and
excessive sensuality, which then with equal suddenness transforms into
penitential paroxysms, world-renunciation, and will-renunciation, both
symptoms perhaps explainable as disguised epilepsy? But nowhere is it
MORE obligatory to put aside explanations around no other type has there
grown such a mass of absurdity and superstition, no other type seems to
have been more interesting to men and even to philosophers--perhaps it
is time to become just a little indifferent here, to learn caution, or,
better still, to look AWAY, TO GO AWAY--Yet in the background of the
most recent philosophy, that of Schopenhauer, we find almost as the
problem in itself, this terrible note of interrogation of the religious
crisis and awakening. How is the negation of will POSSIBLE? how is the
saint possible?--that seems to have been the very question with which
Schopenhauer made a start and became a philosopher. And thus it was a
genuine Schopenhauerian consequence, that his most convinced adherent
(perhaps also his last, as far as Germany is concerned), namely, Richard
Wagner, should bring his own life-work to an end just here, and should
finally put that terrible and eternal type upon the stage as Kundry,
type vecu, and as it loved and lived, at the very time that the
mad-doctors in almost all European countries had an opportunity to study
the type close at hand, wherever the religious neurosis--or as I call
it, "the religious mood"--made its latest epidemical outbreak and
display as the "Salvation Army"--If it be a question, however, as to
what has been so extremely interesting to men of all sorts in all ages,
and even to philosophers, in the whole phenomenon of the saint, it
is undoubtedly the appearance of the miraculous therein--namely, the
immediate SUCCESSION OF OPPOSITES, of states of the soul regarded as
morally antithetical: it was believed here to be self-evident that
a "bad man" was all at once turned into a "saint," a good man. The
hitherto existing psychology was wrecked at this point, is it not
possible it may have happened principally because psychology had placed
itself under the dominion of morals, because it BELIEVED in oppositions
of moral values, and saw, read, and INTERPRETED these oppositions
into the text and facts of the case? What? "Miracle" only an error of
interpretation? A lack of philology?

48. It seems that the Latin races are far more deeply attached to their
Catholicism than we Northerners are to Christianity generally, and
that consequently unbelief in Catholic countries means something quite
different from what it does among Protestants--namely, a sort of revolt
against the spirit of the race, while with us it is rather a return to
the spirit (or non-spirit) of the race.

We Northerners undoubtedly derive our origin from barbarous races, even
as regards our talents for religion--we have POOR talents for it. One
may make an exception in the case of the Celts, who have theretofore
furnished also the best soil for Christian infection in the North: the
Christian ideal blossomed forth in France as much as ever the pale sun
of the north would allow it. How strangely pious for our taste are still
these later French skeptics, whenever there is any Celtic blood in their
origin! How Catholic, how un-German does Auguste Comte's Sociology
seem to us, with the Roman logic of its instincts! How Jesuitical, that
amiable and shrewd cicerone of Port Royal, Sainte-Beuve, in spite of all
his hostility to Jesuits! And even Ernest Renan: how inaccessible to
us Northerners does the language of such a Renan appear, in whom
every instant the merest touch of religious thrill throws his refined
voluptuous and comfortably couching soul off its balance! Let us repeat
after him these fine sentences--and what wickedness and haughtiness is
immediately aroused by way of answer in our probably less beautiful but
harder souls, that is to say, in our more German souls!--"DISONS DONC
HARDIMENT QUE LA RELIGION EST UN PRODUIT DE L'HOMME NORMAL, QUE L'HOMME
EST LE PLUS DANS LE VRAI QUANT IL EST LE PLUS RELIGIEUX ET LE PLUS
ASSURE D'UNE DESTINEE INFINIE.... C'EST QUAND IL EST BON QU'IL VEUT QUE
LA VIRTU CORRESPONDE A UN ORDER ETERNAL, C'EST QUAND IL CONTEMPLE LES
CHOSES D'UNE MANIERE DESINTERESSEE QU'IL TROUVE LA MORT REVOLTANTE ET
ABSURDE. COMMENT NE PAS SUPPOSER QUE C'EST DANS CES MOMENTS-LA, QUE
L'HOMME VOIT LE MIEUX?"... These sentences are so extremely ANTIPODAL
to my ears and habits of thought, that in my first impulse of rage
on finding them, I wrote on the margin, "LA NIAISERIE RELIGIEUSE PAR
EXCELLENCE!"--until in my later rage I even took a fancy to them, these
sentences with their truth absolutely inverted! It is so nice and such a
distinction to have one's own antipodes!

49. That which is so astonishing in the religious life of the ancient
Greeks is the irrestrainable stream of GRATITUDE which it pours
forth--it is a very superior kind of man who takes SUCH an attitude
towards nature and life.--Later on, when the populace got the upper hand
in Greece, FEAR became rampant also in religion; and Christianity was
preparing itself.

50. The passion for God: there are churlish, honest-hearted, and
importunate kinds of it, like that of Luther--the whole of Protestantism
lacks the southern DELICATEZZA. There is an Oriental exaltation of the
mind in it, like that of an undeservedly favoured or elevated slave, as
in the case of St. Augustine, for instance, who lacks in an offensive
manner, all nobility in bearing and desires. There is a feminine
tenderness and sensuality in it, which modestly and unconsciously longs
for a UNIO MYSTICA ET PHYSICA, as in the case of Madame de Guyon. In
many cases it appears, curiously enough, as the disguise of a girl's
or youth's puberty; here and there even as the hysteria of an old maid,
also as her last ambition. The Church has frequently canonized the woman
in such a case.

51. The mightiest men have hitherto always bowed reverently before
the saint, as the enigma of self-subjugation and utter voluntary
privation--why did they thus bow? They divined in him--and as it were
behind the questionableness of his frail and wretched appearance--the
superior force which wished to test itself by such a subjugation; the
strength of will, in which they recognized their own strength and
love of power, and knew how to honour it: they honoured something
in themselves when they honoured the saint. In addition to this, the
contemplation of the saint suggested to them a suspicion: such an
enormity of self-negation and anti-naturalness will not have been
coveted for nothing--they have said, inquiringly. There is perhaps a
reason for it, some very great danger, about which the ascetic might
wish to be more accurately informed through his secret interlocutors and
visitors? In a word, the mighty ones of the world learned to have a new
fear before him, they divined a new power, a strange, still unconquered
enemy:--it was the "Will to Power" which obliged them to halt before the
saint. They had to question him.

52. In the Jewish "Old Testament," the book of divine justice, there are
men, things, and sayings on such an immense scale, that Greek and Indian
literature has nothing to compare with it. One stands with fear and
reverence before those stupendous remains of what man was formerly, and
one has sad thoughts about old Asia and its little out-pushed peninsula
Europe, which would like, by all means, to figure before Asia as the
"Progress of Mankind." To be sure, he who is himself only a slender,
tame house-animal, and knows only the wants of a house-animal (like
our cultured people of today, including the Christians of "cultured"
Christianity), need neither be amazed nor even sad amid those ruins--the
taste for the Old Testament is a touchstone with respect to "great" and
"small": perhaps he will find that the New Testament, the book of grace,
still appeals more to his heart (there is much of the odour of the
genuine, tender, stupid beadsman and petty soul in it). To have bound
up this New Testament (a kind of ROCOCO of taste in every respect) along
with the Old Testament into one book, as the "Bible," as "The Book in
Itself," is perhaps the greatest audacity and "sin against the Spirit"
which literary Europe has upon its conscience.

53. Why Atheism nowadays? "The father" in God is thoroughly refuted;
equally so "the judge," "the rewarder." Also his "free will": he does
not hear--and even if he did, he would not know how to help. The worst
is that he seems incapable of communicating himself clearly; is he
uncertain?--This is what I have made out (by questioning and listening
at a variety of conversations) to be the cause of the decline of
European theism; it appears to me that though the religious instinct is
in vigorous growth,--it rejects the theistic satisfaction with profound
distrust.

54. What does all modern philosophy mainly do? Since Descartes--and
indeed more in defiance of him than on the basis of his procedure--an
ATTENTAT has been made on the part of all philosophers on the old
conception of the soul, under the guise of a criticism of the subject
and predicate conception--that is to say, an ATTENTAT on the
fundamental presupposition of Christian doctrine. Modern philosophy,
as epistemological skepticism, is secretly or openly ANTI-CHRISTIAN,
although (for keener ears, be it said) by no means anti-religious.
Formerly, in effect, one believed in "the soul" as one believed in
grammar and the grammatical subject: one said, "I" is the condition,
"think" is the predicate and is conditioned--to think is an activity for
which one MUST suppose a subject as cause. The attempt was then made,
with marvelous tenacity and subtlety, to see if one could not get out
of this net,--to see if the opposite was not perhaps true: "think" the
condition, and "I" the conditioned; "I," therefore, only a synthesis
which has been MADE by thinking itself. KANT really wished to prove
that, starting from the subject, the subject could not be proved--nor
the object either: the possibility of an APPARENT EXISTENCE of the
subject, and therefore of "the soul," may not always have been strange
to him,--the thought which once had an immense power on earth as the
Vedanta philosophy.

55. There is a great ladder of religious cruelty, with many rounds; but
three of these are the most important. Once on a time men sacrificed
human beings to their God, and perhaps just those they loved the
best--to this category belong the firstling sacrifices of all primitive
religions, and also the sacrifice of the Emperor Tiberius in the
Mithra-Grotto on the Island of Capri, that most terrible of all Roman
anachronisms. Then, during the moral epoch of mankind, they sacrificed
to their God the strongest instincts they possessed, their "nature";
THIS festal joy shines in the cruel glances of ascetics and
"anti-natural" fanatics. Finally, what still remained to be sacrificed?
Was it not necessary in the end for men to sacrifice everything
comforting, holy, healing, all hope, all faith in hidden harmonies, in
future blessedness and justice? Was it not necessary to sacrifice God
himself, and out of cruelty to themselves to worship stone, stupidity,
gravity, fate, nothingness? To sacrifice God for nothingness--this
paradoxical mystery of the ultimate cruelty has been reserved for the
rising generation; we all know something thereof already.

56. Whoever, like myself, prompted by some enigmatical desire, has long
endeavoured to go to the bottom of the question of pessimism and free it
from the half-Christian, half-German narrowness and stupidity in which
it has finally presented itself to this century, namely, in the form of
Schopenhauer's philosophy; whoever, with an Asiatic and super-Asiatic
eye, has actually looked inside, and into the most world-renouncing of
all possible modes of thought--beyond good and evil, and no longer
like Buddha and Schopenhauer, under the dominion and delusion of
morality,--whoever has done this, has perhaps just thereby, without
really desiring it, opened his eyes to behold the opposite ideal: the
ideal of the most world-approving, exuberant, and vivacious man, who has
not only learnt to compromise and arrange with that which was and
is, but wishes to have it again AS IT WAS AND IS, for all eternity,
insatiably calling out da capo, not only to himself, but to the whole
piece and play; and not only the play, but actually to him who requires
the play--and makes it necessary; because he always requires
himself anew--and makes himself necessary.--What? And this would not
be--circulus vitiosus deus?

57. The distance, and as it were the space around man, grows with the
strength of his intellectual vision and insight: his world becomes
profounder; new stars, new enigmas, and notions are ever coming into
view. Perhaps everything on which the intellectual eye has exercised
its acuteness and profundity has just been an occasion for its exercise,
something of a game, something for children and childish minds. Perhaps
the most solemn conceptions that have caused the most fighting and
suffering, the conceptions "God" and "sin," will one day seem to us of
no more importance than a child's plaything or a child's pain seems to
an old man;--and perhaps another plaything and another pain will then
be necessary once more for "the old man"--always childish enough, an
eternal child!

58. Has it been observed to what extent outward idleness, or
semi-idleness, is necessary to a real religious life (alike for its
favourite microscopic labour of self-examination, and for its soft
placidity called "prayer," the state of perpetual readiness for the
"coming of God"), I mean the idleness with a good conscience, the
idleness of olden times and of blood, to which the aristocratic
sentiment that work is DISHONOURING--that it vulgarizes body and
soul--is not quite unfamiliar? And that consequently the modern, noisy,
time-engrossing, conceited, foolishly proud laboriousness educates
and prepares for "unbelief" more than anything else? Among these, for
instance, who are at present living apart from religion in Germany, I
find "free-thinkers" of diversified species and origin, but above all
a majority of those in whom laboriousness from generation to generation
has dissolved the religious instincts; so that they no longer know what
purpose religions serve, and only note their existence in the world
with a kind of dull astonishment. They feel themselves already fully
occupied, these good people, be it by their business or by their
pleasures, not to mention the "Fatherland," and the newspapers, and
their "family duties"; it seems that they have no time whatever left
for religion; and above all, it is not obvious to them whether it is a
question of a new business or a new pleasure--for it is impossible, they
say to themselves, that people should go to church merely to spoil
their tempers. They are by no means enemies of religious customs;
should certain circumstances, State affairs perhaps, require their
participation in such customs, they do what is required, as so many
things are done--with a patient and unassuming seriousness, and without
much curiosity or discomfort;--they live too much apart and outside
to feel even the necessity for a FOR or AGAINST in such matters. Among
those indifferent persons may be reckoned nowadays the majority of
German Protestants of the middle classes, especially in the great
laborious centres of trade and commerce; also the majority of laborious
scholars, and the entire University personnel (with the exception of
the theologians, whose existence and possibility there always gives
psychologists new and more subtle puzzles to solve). On the part of
pious, or merely church-going people, there is seldom any idea of HOW
MUCH good-will, one might say arbitrary will, is now necessary for a
German scholar to take the problem of religion seriously; his whole
profession (and as I have said, his whole workmanlike laboriousness, to
which he is compelled by his modern conscience) inclines him to a
lofty and almost charitable serenity as regards religion, with which is
occasionally mingled a slight disdain for the "uncleanliness" of spirit
which he takes for granted wherever any one still professes to belong
to the Church. It is only with the help of history (NOT through his own
personal experience, therefore) that the scholar succeeds in bringing
himself to a respectful seriousness, and to a certain timid deference
in presence of religions; but even when his sentiments have reached the
stage of gratitude towards them, he has not personally advanced one
step nearer to that which still maintains itself as Church or as piety;
perhaps even the contrary. The practical indifference to religious
matters in the midst of which he has been born and brought up, usually
sublimates itself in his case into circumspection and cleanliness, which
shuns contact with religious men and things; and it may be just the
depth of his tolerance and humanity which prompts him to avoid the
delicate trouble which tolerance itself brings with it.--Every age has
its own divine type of naivete, for the discovery of which other ages
may envy it: and how much naivete--adorable, childlike, and boundlessly
foolish naivete is involved in this belief of the scholar in
his superiority, in the good conscience of his tolerance, in the
unsuspecting, simple certainty with which his instinct treats the
religious man as a lower and less valuable type, beyond, before, and
ABOVE which he himself has developed--he, the little arrogant dwarf
and mob-man, the sedulously alert, head-and-hand drudge of "ideas," of
"modern ideas"!

59. Whoever has seen deeply into the world has doubtless divined what
wisdom there is in the fact that men are superficial. It is their
preservative instinct which teaches them to be flighty, lightsome, and
false. Here and there one finds a passionate and exaggerated adoration
of "pure forms" in philosophers as well as in artists: it is not to be
doubted that whoever has NEED of the cult of the superficial to that
extent, has at one time or another made an unlucky dive BENEATH it.
Perhaps there is even an order of rank with respect to those burnt
children, the born artists who find the enjoyment of life only in trying
to FALSIFY its image (as if taking wearisome revenge on it), one might
guess to what degree life has disgusted them, by the extent to which
they wish to see its image falsified, attenuated, ultrified, and
deified,--one might reckon the homines religiosi among the artists, as
their HIGHEST rank. It is the profound, suspicious fear of an incurable
pessimism which compels whole centuries to fasten their teeth into a
religious interpretation of existence: the fear of the instinct which
divines that truth might be attained TOO soon, before man has become
strong enough, hard enough, artist enough.... Piety, the "Life in God,"
regarded in this light, would appear as the most elaborate and
ultimate product of the FEAR of truth, as artist-adoration
and artist-intoxication in presence of the most logical of all
falsifications, as the will to the inversion of truth, to untruth at
any price. Perhaps there has hitherto been no more effective means of
beautifying man than piety, by means of it man can become so artful, so
superficial, so iridescent, and so good, that his appearance no longer
offends.

60. To love mankind FOR GOD'S SAKE--this has so far been the noblest and
remotest sentiment to which mankind has attained. That love to mankind,
without any redeeming intention in the background, is only an ADDITIONAL
folly and brutishness, that the inclination to this love has first to
get its proportion, its delicacy, its gram of salt and sprinkling
of ambergris from a higher inclination--whoever first perceived
and "experienced" this, however his tongue may have stammered as it
attempted to express such a delicate matter, let him for all time be
holy and respected, as the man who has so far flown highest and gone
astray in the finest fashion!

61. The philosopher, as WE free spirits understand him--as the man of
the greatest responsibility, who has the conscience for the general
development of mankind,--will use religion for his disciplining and
educating work, just as he will use the contemporary political
and economic conditions. The selecting and disciplining
influence--destructive, as well as creative and fashioning--which can be
exercised by means of religion is manifold and varied, according to the
sort of people placed under its spell and protection. For those who are
strong and independent, destined and trained to command, in whom the
judgment and skill of a ruling race is incorporated, religion is
an additional means for overcoming resistance in the exercise of
authority--as a bond which binds rulers and subjects in common,
betraying and surrendering to the former the conscience of the latter,
their inmost heart, which would fain escape obedience. And in the
case of the unique natures of noble origin, if by virtue of superior
spirituality they should incline to a more retired and contemplative
life, reserving to themselves only the more refined forms of government
(over chosen disciples or members of an order), religion itself may
be used as a means for obtaining peace from the noise and trouble of
managing GROSSER affairs, and for securing immunity from the UNAVOIDABLE
filth of all political agitation. The Brahmins, for instance, understood
this fact. With the help of a religious organization, they secured to
themselves the power of nominating kings for the people, while their
sentiments prompted them to keep apart and outside, as men with a higher
and super-regal mission. At the same time religion gives inducement and
opportunity to some of the subjects to qualify themselves for future
ruling and commanding the slowly ascending ranks and classes, in which,
through fortunate marriage customs, volitional power and delight in
self-control are on the increase. To them religion offers sufficient
incentives and temptations to aspire to higher intellectuality, and to
experience the sentiments of authoritative self-control, of silence, and
of solitude. Asceticism and Puritanism are almost indispensable means of
educating and ennobling a race which seeks to rise above its hereditary
baseness and work itself upwards to future supremacy. And finally, to
ordinary men, to the majority of the people, who exist for service and
general utility, and are only so far entitled to exist, religion gives
invaluable contentedness with their lot and condition, peace of heart,
ennoblement of obedience, additional social happiness and sympathy,
with something of transfiguration and embellishment, something of
justification of all the commonplaceness, all the meanness, all
the semi-animal poverty of their souls. Religion, together with the
religious significance of life, sheds sunshine over such perpetually
harassed men, and makes even their own aspect endurable to them, it
operates upon them as the Epicurean philosophy usually operates upon
sufferers of a higher order, in a refreshing and refining manner,
almost TURNING suffering TO ACCOUNT, and in the end even hallowing and
vindicating it. There is perhaps nothing so admirable in Christianity
and Buddhism as their art of teaching even the lowest to elevate
themselves by piety to a seemingly higher order of things, and thereby
to retain their satisfaction with the actual world in which they find it
difficult enough to live--this very difficulty being necessary.

62. To be sure--to make also the bad counter-reckoning against such
religions, and to bring to light their secret dangers--the cost is
always excessive and terrible when religions do NOT operate as an
educational and disciplinary medium in the hands of the philosopher, but
rule voluntarily and PARAMOUNTLY, when they wish to be the final end,
and not a means along with other means. Among men, as among all other
animals, there is a surplus of defective, diseased, degenerating,
infirm, and necessarily suffering individuals; the successful cases,
among men also, are always the exception; and in view of the fact that
man is THE ANIMAL NOT YET PROPERLY ADAPTED TO HIS ENVIRONMENT, the rare
exception. But worse still. The higher the type a man represents, the
greater is the improbability that he will SUCCEED; the accidental, the
law of irrationality in the general constitution of mankind, manifests
itself most terribly in its destructive effect on the higher orders of
men, the conditions of whose lives are delicate, diverse, and difficult
to determine. What, then, is the attitude of the two greatest religions
above-mentioned to the SURPLUS of failures in life? They endeavour
to preserve and keep alive whatever can be preserved; in fact, as the
religions FOR SUFFERERS, they take the part of these upon principle;
they are always in favour of those who suffer from life as from a
disease, and they would fain treat every other experience of life as
false and impossible. However highly we may esteem this indulgent and
preservative care (inasmuch as in applying to others, it has applied,
and applies also to the highest and usually the most suffering type of
man), the hitherto PARAMOUNT religions--to give a general appreciation
of them--are among the principal causes which have kept the type of
"man" upon a lower level--they have preserved too much THAT WHICH SHOULD
HAVE PERISHED. One has to thank them for invaluable services; and who is
sufficiently rich in gratitude not to feel poor at the contemplation
of all that the "spiritual men" of Christianity have done for Europe
hitherto! But when they had given comfort to the sufferers, courage to
the oppressed and despairing, a staff and support to the helpless,
and when they had allured from society into convents and spiritual
penitentiaries the broken-hearted and distracted: what else had they
to do in order to work systematically in that fashion, and with a good
conscience, for the preservation of all the sick and suffering, which
means, in deed and in truth, to work for the DETERIORATION OF THE
EUROPEAN RACE? To REVERSE all estimates of value--THAT is what they
had to do! And to shatter the strong, to spoil great hopes, to cast
suspicion on the delight in beauty, to break down everything autonomous,
manly, conquering, and imperious--all instincts which are natural to the
highest and most successful type of "man"--into uncertainty, distress
of conscience, and self-destruction; forsooth, to invert all love of the
earthly and of supremacy over the earth, into hatred of the earth and
earthly things--THAT is the task the Church imposed on itself, and
was obliged to impose, until, according to its standard of value,
"unworldliness," "unsensuousness," and "higher man" fused into one
sentiment. If one could observe the strangely painful, equally coarse
and refined comedy of European Christianity with the derisive and
impartial eye of an Epicurean god, I should think one would never cease
marvelling and laughing; does it not actually seem that some single will
has ruled over Europe for eighteen centuries in order to make a SUBLIME
ABORTION of man? He, however, who, with opposite requirements (no longer
Epicurean) and with some divine hammer in his hand, could approach this
almost voluntary degeneration and stunting of mankind, as exemplified in
the European Christian (Pascal, for instance), would he not have to
cry aloud with rage, pity, and horror: "Oh, you bunglers, presumptuous
pitiful bunglers, what have you done! Was that a work for your hands?
How you have hacked and botched my finest stone! What have you presumed
to do!"--I should say that Christianity has hitherto been the most
portentous of presumptions. Men, not great enough, nor hard enough,
to be entitled as artists to take part in fashioning MAN; men,
not sufficiently strong and far-sighted to ALLOW, with sublime
self-constraint, the obvious law of the thousandfold failures and
perishings to prevail; men, not sufficiently noble to see the radically
different grades of rank and intervals of rank that separate man from
man:--SUCH men, with their "equality before God," have hitherto swayed
the destiny of Europe; until at last a dwarfed, almost ludicrous species
has been produced, a gregarious animal, something obliging, sickly,
mediocre, the European of the present day.



CHAPTER IV. APOPHTHEGMS AND INTERLUDES


63. He who is a thorough teacher takes things seriously--and even
himself--only in relation to his pupils.

64. "Knowledge for its own sake"--that is the last snare laid by
morality: we are thereby completely entangled in morals once more.

65. The charm of knowledge would be small, were it not so much shame has
to be overcome on the way to it.

65A. We are most dishonourable towards our God: he is not PERMITTED to
sin.

66. The tendency of a person to allow himself to be degraded, robbed,
deceived, and exploited might be the diffidence of a God among men.

67. Love to one only is a barbarity, for it is exercised at the expense
of all others. Love to God also!

68. "I did that," says my memory. "I could not have done that," says my
pride, and remains inexorable. Eventually--the memory yields.

69. One has regarded life carelessly, if one has failed to see the hand
that--kills with leniency.

70. If a man has character, he has also his typical experience, which
always recurs.

71. THE SAGE AS ASTRONOMER.--So long as thou feelest the stars as an
"above thee," thou lackest the eye of the discerning one.

72. It is not the strength, but the duration of great sentiments that
makes great men.

73. He who attains his ideal, precisely thereby surpasses it.

73A. Many a peacock hides his tail from every eye--and calls it his
pride.

74. A man of genius is unbearable, unless he possess at least two things
besides: gratitude and purity.

75. The degree and nature of a man's sensuality extends to the highest
altitudes of his spirit.

76. Under peaceful conditions the militant man attacks himself.

77. With his principles a man seeks either to dominate, or justify,
or honour, or reproach, or conceal his habits: two men with the same
principles probably seek fundamentally different ends therewith.

78. He who despises himself, nevertheless esteems himself thereby, as a
despiser.

79. A soul which knows that it is loved, but does not itself love,
betrays its sediment: its dregs come up.

80. A thing that is explained ceases to concern us--What did the God
mean who gave the advice, "Know thyself!" Did it perhaps imply "Cease to
be concerned about thyself! become objective!"--And Socrates?--And the
"scientific man"?

81. It is terrible to die of thirst at sea. Is it necessary that you
should so salt your truth that it will no longer--quench thirst?

82. "Sympathy for all"--would be harshness and tyranny for THEE, my good
neighbour.

83. INSTINCT--When the house is on fire one forgets even the
dinner--Yes, but one recovers it from among the ashes.

84. Woman learns how to hate in proportion as she--forgets how to charm.

85. The same emotions are in man and woman, but in different TEMPO, on
that account man and woman never cease to misunderstand each other.

86. In the background of all their personal vanity, women themselves
have still their impersonal scorn--for "woman".

87. FETTERED HEART, FREE SPIRIT--When one firmly fetters one's heart
and keeps it prisoner, one can allow one's spirit many liberties: I said
this once before But people do not believe it when I say so, unless they
know it already.

88. One begins to distrust very clever persons when they become
embarrassed.

89. Dreadful experiences raise the question whether he who experiences
them is not something dreadful also.

90. Heavy, melancholy men turn lighter, and come temporarily to their
surface, precisely by that which makes others heavy--by hatred and love.

91. So cold, so icy, that one burns one's finger at the touch of him!
Every hand that lays hold of him shrinks back!--And for that very reason
many think him red-hot.

92. Who has not, at one time or another--sacrificed himself for the sake
of his good name?

93. In affability there is no hatred of men, but precisely on that
account a great deal too much contempt of men.

94. The maturity of man--that means, to have reacquired the seriousness
that one had as a child at play.

95. To be ashamed of one's immorality is a step on the ladder at the end
of which one is ashamed also of one's morality.

96. One should part from life as Ulysses parted from Nausicaa--blessing
it rather than in love with it.

97. What? A great man? I always see merely the play-actor of his own
ideal.

98. When one trains one's conscience, it kisses one while it bites.

99. THE DISAPPOINTED ONE SPEAKS--"I listened for the echo and I heard
only praise."

100. We all feign to ourselves that we are simpler than we are, we thus
relax ourselves away from our fellows.

101. A discerning one might easily regard himself at present as the
animalization of God.

102. Discovering reciprocal love should really disenchant the lover with
regard to the beloved. "What! She is modest enough to love even you? Or
stupid enough? Or--or---"

103. THE DANGER IN HAPPINESS.--"Everything now turns out best for me, I
now love every fate:--who would like to be my fate?"

104. Not their love of humanity, but the impotence of their love,
prevents the Christians of today--burning us.

105. The pia fraus is still more repugnant to the taste (the "piety")
of the free spirit (the "pious man of knowledge") than the impia fraus.
Hence the profound lack of judgment, in comparison with the Church,
characteristic of the type "free spirit"--as ITS non-freedom.

106. By means of music the very passions enjoy themselves.

107. A sign of strong character, when once the resolution has been
taken, to shut the ear even to the best counter-arguments. Occasionally,
therefore, a will to stupidity.

108. There is no such thing as moral phenomena, but only a moral
interpretation of phenomena.

109. The criminal is often enough not equal to his deed: he extenuates
and maligns it.

110. The advocates of a criminal are seldom artists enough to turn the
beautiful terribleness of the deed to the advantage of the doer.

111. Our vanity is most difficult to wound just when our pride has been
wounded.

112. To him who feels himself preordained to contemplation and not to
belief, all believers are too noisy and obtrusive; he guards against
them.

113. "You want to prepossess him in your favour? Then you must be
embarrassed before him."

114. The immense expectation with regard to sexual love, and the coyness
in this expectation, spoils all the perspectives of women at the outset.

115. Where there is neither love nor hatred in the game, woman's play is
mediocre.

116. The great epochs of our life are at the points when we gain courage
to rebaptize our badness as the best in us.

117. The will to overcome an emotion, is ultimately only the will of
another, or of several other, emotions.

118. There is an innocence of admiration: it is possessed by him to whom
it has not yet occurred that he himself may be admired some day.

119. Our loathing of dirt may be so great as to prevent our cleaning
ourselves--"justifying" ourselves.

120. Sensuality often forces the growth of love too much, so that its
root remains weak, and is easily torn up.

121. It is a curious thing that God learned Greek when he wished to turn
author--and that he did not learn it better.

122. To rejoice on account of praise is in many cases merely politeness
of heart--and the very opposite of vanity of spirit.

123. Even concubinage has been corrupted--by marriage.

124. He who exults at the stake, does not triumph over pain, but because
of the fact that he does not feel pain where he expected it. A parable.

125. When we have to change an opinion about any one, we charge heavily
to his account the inconvenience he thereby causes us.

126. A nation is a detour of nature to arrive at six or seven great
men.--Yes, and then to get round them.

127. In the eyes of all true women science is hostile to the sense of
shame. They feel as if one wished to peep under their skin with it--or
worse still! under their dress and finery.

128. The more abstract the truth you wish to teach, the more must you
allure the senses to it.

129. The devil has the most extensive perspectives for God; on that
account he keeps so far away from him:--the devil, in effect, as the
oldest friend of knowledge.

130. What a person IS begins to betray itself when his talent
decreases,--when he ceases to show what he CAN do. Talent is also an
adornment; an adornment is also a concealment.

131. The sexes deceive themselves about each other: the reason is that
in reality they honour and love only themselves (or their own ideal, to
express it more agreeably). Thus man wishes woman to be peaceable: but
in fact woman is ESSENTIALLY unpeaceable, like the cat, however well she
may have assumed the peaceable demeanour.

132. One is punished best for one's virtues.

133. He who cannot find the way to HIS ideal, lives more frivolously and
shamelessly than the man without an ideal.

134. From the senses originate all trustworthiness, all good conscience,
all evidence of truth.

135. Pharisaism is not a deterioration of the good man; a considerable
part of it is rather an essential condition of being good.

136. The one seeks an accoucheur for his thoughts, the other seeks some
one whom he can assist: a good conversation thus originates.

137. In intercourse with scholars and artists one readily makes mistakes
of opposite kinds: in a remarkable scholar one not infrequently finds
a mediocre man; and often, even in a mediocre artist, one finds a very
remarkable man.

138. We do the same when awake as when dreaming: we only invent and
imagine him with whom we have intercourse--and forget it immediately.

139. In revenge and in love woman is more barbarous than man.

140. ADVICE AS A RIDDLE.--"If the band is not to break, bite it
first--secure to make!"

141. The belly is the reason why man does not so readily take himself
for a God.

142. The chastest utterance I ever heard: "Dans le veritable amour c'est
l'ame qui enveloppe le corps."

143. Our vanity would like what we do best to pass precisely for what is
most difficult to us.--Concerning the origin of many systems of morals.

144. When a woman has scholarly inclinations there is generally
something wrong with her sexual nature. Barrenness itself conduces to a
certain virility of taste; man, indeed, if I may say so, is "the barren
animal."

145. Comparing man and woman generally, one may say that woman would
not have the genius for adornment, if she had not the instinct for the
SECONDARY role.

146. He who fights with monsters should be careful lest he thereby
become a monster. And if thou gaze long into an abyss, the abyss will
also gaze into thee.

147. From old Florentine novels--moreover, from life: Buona femmina e
mala femmina vuol bastone.--Sacchetti, Nov. 86.

148. To seduce their neighbour to a favourable opinion, and afterwards
to believe implicitly in this opinion of their neighbour--who can do
this conjuring trick so well as women?

149. That which an age considers evil is usually an unseasonable echo of
what was formerly considered good--the atavism of an old ideal.

150. Around the hero everything becomes a tragedy; around the
demigod everything becomes a satyr-play; and around God everything
becomes--what? perhaps a "world"?

151. It is not enough to possess a talent: one must also have your
permission to possess it;--eh, my friends?

152. "Where there is the tree of knowledge, there is always Paradise":
so say the most ancient and the most modern serpents.

153. What is done out of love always takes place beyond good and evil.

154. Objection, evasion, joyous distrust, and love of irony are signs of
health; everything absolute belongs to pathology.

155. The sense of the tragic increases and declines with sensuousness.

156. Insanity in individuals is something rare--but in groups, parties,
nations, and epochs it is the rule.

157. The thought of suicide is a great consolation: by means of it one
gets successfully through many a bad night.

158. Not only our reason, but also our conscience, truckles to our
strongest impulse--the tyrant in us.

159. One MUST repay good and ill; but why just to the person who did us
good or ill?

160. One no longer loves one's knowledge sufficiently after one has
communicated it.

161. Poets act shamelessly towards their experiences: they exploit them.

162. "Our fellow-creature is not our neighbour, but our neighbour's
neighbour":--so thinks every nation.

163. Love brings to light the noble and hidden qualities of a lover--his
rare and exceptional traits: it is thus liable to be deceptive as to his
normal character.

164. Jesus said to his Jews: "The law was for servants;--love God as I
love him, as his Son! What have we Sons of God to do with morals!"

165. IN SIGHT OF EVERY PARTY.--A shepherd has always need of a
bell-wether--or he has himself to be a wether occasionally.

166. One may indeed lie with the mouth; but with the accompanying
grimace one nevertheless tells the truth.

167. To vigorous men intimacy is a matter of shame--and something
precious.

168. Christianity gave Eros poison to drink; he did not die of it,
certainly, but degenerated to Vice.

169. To talk much about oneself may also be a means of concealing
oneself.

170. In praise there is more obtrusiveness than in blame.

171. Pity has an almost ludicrous effect on a man of knowledge, like
tender hands on a Cyclops.

172. One occasionally embraces some one or other, out of love to mankind
(because one cannot embrace all); but this is what one must never
confess to the individual.

173. One does not hate as long as one disesteems, but only when one
esteems equal or superior.

174. Ye Utilitarians--ye, too, love the UTILE only as a VEHICLE for
your inclinations,--ye, too, really find the noise of its wheels
insupportable!

175. One loves ultimately one's desires, not the thing desired.

176. The vanity of others is only counter to our taste when it is
counter to our vanity.

177. With regard to what "truthfulness" is, perhaps nobody has ever been
sufficiently truthful.

178. One does not believe in the follies of clever men: what a
forfeiture of the rights of man!

179. The consequences of our actions seize us by the forelock, very
indifferent to the fact that we have meanwhile "reformed."

180. There is an innocence in lying which is the sign of good faith in a
cause.

181. It is inhuman to bless when one is being cursed.

182. The familiarity of superiors embitters one, because it may not be
returned.

183. "I am affected, not because you have deceived me, but because I can
no longer believe in you."

184. There is a haughtiness of kindness which has the appearance of
wickedness.

185. "I dislike him."--Why?--"I am not a match for him."--Did any one
ever answer so?



CHAPTER V. THE NATURAL HISTORY OF MORALS


186. The moral sentiment in Europe at present is perhaps as subtle,
belated, diverse, sensitive, and refined, as the "Science of Morals"
belonging thereto is recent, initial, awkward, and coarse-fingered:--an
interesting contrast, which sometimes becomes incarnate and obvious
in the very person of a moralist. Indeed, the expression, "Science
of Morals" is, in respect to what is designated thereby, far too
presumptuous and counter to GOOD taste,--which is always a foretaste of
more modest expressions. One ought to avow with the utmost fairness WHAT
is still necessary here for a long time, WHAT is alone proper for the
present: namely, the collection of material, the comprehensive survey
and classification of an immense domain of delicate sentiments of worth,
and distinctions of worth, which live, grow, propagate, and perish--and
perhaps attempts to give a clear idea of the recurring and more common
forms of these living crystallizations--as preparation for a THEORY OF
TYPES of morality. To be sure, people have not hitherto been so modest.
All the philosophers, with a pedantic and ridiculous seriousness,
demanded of themselves something very much higher, more pretentious, and
ceremonious, when they concerned themselves with morality as a science:
they wanted to GIVE A BASIC to morality--and every philosopher hitherto
has believed that he has given it a basis; morality itself, however, has
been regarded as something "given." How far from their awkward pride
was the seemingly insignificant problem--left in dust and decay--of a
description of forms of morality, notwithstanding that the finest hands
and senses could hardly be fine enough for it! It was precisely owing to
moral philosophers' knowing the moral facts imperfectly, in an arbitrary
epitome, or an accidental abridgement--perhaps as the morality of
their environment, their position, their church, their Zeitgeist, their
climate and zone--it was precisely because they were badly instructed
with regard to nations, eras, and past ages, and were by no means eager
to know about these matters, that they did not even come in sight of the
real problems of morals--problems which only disclose themselves by
a comparison of MANY kinds of morality. In every "Science of Morals"
hitherto, strange as it may sound, the problem of morality itself
has been OMITTED: there has been no suspicion that there was anything
problematic there! That which philosophers called "giving a basis to
morality," and endeavoured to realize, has, when seen in a right light,
proved merely a learned form of good FAITH in prevailing morality, a new
means of its EXPRESSION, consequently just a matter-of-fact within the
sphere of a definite morality, yea, in its ultimate motive, a sort of
denial that it is LAWFUL for this morality to be called in question--and
in any case the reverse of the testing, analyzing, doubting, and
vivisecting of this very faith. Hear, for instance, with what
innocence--almost worthy of honour--Schopenhauer represents his own
task, and draw your conclusions concerning the scientificness of a
"Science" whose latest master still talks in the strain of children and
old wives: "The principle," he says (page 136 of the Grundprobleme der
Ethik), [Footnote: Pages 54-55 of Schopenhauer's Basis of Morality,
translated by Arthur B. Bullock, M.A. (1903).] "the axiom about the
purport of which all moralists are PRACTICALLY agreed: neminem laede,
immo omnes quantum potes juva--is REALLY the proposition which all moral
teachers strive to establish, ... the REAL basis of ethics which
has been sought, like the philosopher's stone, for centuries."--The
difficulty of establishing the proposition referred to may indeed be
great--it is well known that Schopenhauer also was unsuccessful in his
efforts; and whoever has thoroughly realized how absurdly false and
sentimental this proposition is, in a world whose essence is Will
to Power, may be reminded that Schopenhauer, although a pessimist,
ACTUALLY--played the flute... daily after dinner: one may read about
the matter in his biography. A question by the way: a pessimist, a
repudiator of God and of the world, who MAKES A HALT at morality--who
assents to morality, and plays the flute to laede-neminem morals, what?
Is that really--a pessimist?

187. Apart from the value of such assertions as "there is a categorical
imperative in us," one can always ask: What does such an assertion
indicate about him who makes it? There are systems of morals which are
meant to justify their author in the eyes of other people; other systems
of morals are meant to tranquilize him, and make him self-satisfied;
with other systems he wants to crucify and humble himself, with others
he wishes to take revenge, with others to conceal himself, with others
to glorify himself and gave superiority and distinction,--this system of
morals helps its author to forget, that system makes him, or something
of him, forgotten, many a moralist would like to exercise power and
creative arbitrariness over mankind, many another, perhaps, Kant
especially, gives us to understand by his morals that "what is estimable
in me, is that I know how to obey--and with you it SHALL not be
otherwise than with me!" In short, systems of morals are only a
SIGN-LANGUAGE OF THE EMOTIONS.

188. In contrast to laisser-aller, every system of morals is a sort of
tyranny against "nature" and also against "reason", that is, however, no
objection, unless one should again decree by some system of morals, that
all kinds of tyranny and unreasonableness are unlawful What is
essential and invaluable in every system of morals, is that it is a
long constraint. In order to understand Stoicism, or Port Royal,
or Puritanism, one should remember the constraint under which every
language has attained to strength and freedom--the metrical constraint,
the tyranny of rhyme and rhythm. How much trouble have the poets and
orators of every nation given themselves!--not excepting some of
the prose writers of today, in whose ear dwells an inexorable
conscientiousness--"for the sake of a folly," as utilitarian bunglers
say, and thereby deem themselves wise--"from submission to arbitrary
laws," as the anarchists say, and thereby fancy themselves "free," even
free-spirited. The singular fact remains, however, that everything
of the nature of freedom, elegance, boldness, dance, and masterly
certainty, which exists or has existed, whether it be in thought itself,
or in administration, or in speaking and persuading, in art just as in
conduct, has only developed by means of the tyranny of such arbitrary
law, and in all seriousness, it is not at all improbable that precisely
this is "nature" and "natural"--and not laisser-aller! Every artist
knows how different from the state of letting himself go, is his
"most natural" condition, the free arranging, locating, disposing,
and constructing in the moments of "inspiration"--and how strictly and
delicately he then obeys a thousand laws, which, by their very rigidness
and precision, defy all formulation by means of ideas (even the most
stable idea has, in comparison therewith, something floating, manifold,
and ambiguous in it). The essential thing "in heaven and in earth" is,
apparently (to repeat it once more), that there should be long OBEDIENCE
in the same direction, there thereby results, and has always resulted in
the long run, something which has made life worth living; for instance,
virtue, art, music, dancing, reason, spirituality--anything whatever
that is transfiguring, refined, foolish, or divine. The long bondage of
the spirit, the distrustful constraint in the communicability of
ideas, the discipline which the thinker imposed on himself to think
in accordance with the rules of a church or a court, or conformable
to Aristotelian premises, the persistent spiritual will to interpret
everything that happened according to a Christian scheme, and in every
occurrence to rediscover and justify the Christian God:--all this
violence, arbitrariness, severity, dreadfulness, and unreasonableness,
has proved itself the disciplinary means whereby the European spirit has
attained its strength, its remorseless curiosity and subtle mobility;
granted also that much irrecoverable strength and spirit had to be
stifled, suffocated, and spoilt in the process (for here, as everywhere,
"nature" shows herself as she is, in all her extravagant and INDIFFERENT
magnificence, which is shocking, but nevertheless noble). That
for centuries European thinkers only thought in order to prove
something--nowadays, on the contrary, we are suspicious of every thinker
who "wishes to prove something"--that it was always settled beforehand
what WAS TO BE the result of their strictest thinking, as it was perhaps
in the Asiatic astrology of former times, or as it is still at the
present day in the innocent, Christian-moral explanation of immediate
personal events "for the glory of God," or "for the good of the
soul":--this tyranny, this arbitrariness, this severe and magnificent
stupidity, has EDUCATED the spirit; slavery, both in the coarser and
the finer sense, is apparently an indispensable means even of spiritual
education and discipline. One may look at every system of morals in this
light: it is "nature" therein which teaches to hate the laisser-aller,
the too great freedom, and implants the need for limited horizons, for
immediate duties--it teaches the NARROWING OF PERSPECTIVES, and thus, in
a certain sense, that stupidity is a condition of life and development.
"Thou must obey some one, and for a long time; OTHERWISE thou wilt come
to grief, and lose all respect for thyself"--this seems to me to be the
moral imperative of nature, which is certainly neither "categorical,"
as old Kant wished (consequently the "otherwise"), nor does it address
itself to the individual (what does nature care for the individual!),
but to nations, races, ages, and ranks; above all, however, to the
animal "man" generally, to MANKIND.

189. Industrious races find it a great hardship to be idle: it was a
master stroke of ENGLISH instinct to hallow and begloom Sunday to such
an extent that the Englishman unconsciously hankers for his week--and
work-day again:--as a kind of cleverly devised, cleverly intercalated
FAST, such as is also frequently found in the ancient world (although,
as is appropriate in southern nations, not precisely with respect
to work). Many kinds of fasts are necessary; and wherever powerful
influences and habits prevail, legislators have to see that intercalary
days are appointed, on which such impulses are fettered, and learn to
hunger anew. Viewed from a higher standpoint, whole generations and
epochs, when they show themselves infected with any moral fanaticism,
seem like those intercalated periods of restraint and fasting, during
which an impulse learns to humble and submit itself--at the same time
also to PURIFY and SHARPEN itself; certain philosophical sects likewise
admit of a similar interpretation (for instance, the Stoa, in the midst
of Hellenic culture, with the atmosphere rank and overcharged with
Aphrodisiacal odours).--Here also is a hint for the explanation of the
paradox, why it was precisely in the most Christian period of European
history, and in general only under the pressure of Christian sentiments,
that the sexual impulse sublimated into love (amour-passion).

190. There is something in the morality of Plato which does not really
belong to Plato, but which only appears in his philosophy, one might
say, in spite of him: namely, Socratism, for which he himself was
too noble. "No one desires to injure himself, hence all evil is done
unwittingly. The evil man inflicts injury on himself; he would not do
so, however, if he knew that evil is evil. The evil man, therefore, is
only evil through error; if one free him from error one will necessarily
make him--good."--This mode of reasoning savours of the POPULACE, who
perceive only the unpleasant consequences of evil-doing, and practically
judge that "it is STUPID to do wrong"; while they accept "good" as
identical with "useful and pleasant," without further thought. As
regards every system of utilitarianism, one may at once assume that it
has the same origin, and follow the scent: one will seldom err.--Plato
did all he could to interpret something refined and noble into the
tenets of his teacher, and above all to interpret himself into them--he,
the most daring of all interpreters, who lifted the entire Socrates out
of the street, as a popular theme and song, to exhibit him in endless
and impossible modifications--namely, in all his own disguises and
multiplicities. In jest, and in Homeric language as well, what is the
Platonic Socrates, if not--[Greek words inserted here.]

191. The old theological problem of "Faith" and "Knowledge," or more
plainly, of instinct and reason--the question whether, in respect to the
valuation of things, instinct deserves more authority than rationality,
which wants to appreciate and act according to motives, according to
a "Why," that is to say, in conformity to purpose and utility--it
is always the old moral problem that first appeared in the person of
Socrates, and had divided men's minds long before Christianity. Socrates
himself, following, of course, the taste of his talent--that of a
surpassing dialectician--took first the side of reason; and, in fact,
what did he do all his life but laugh at the awkward incapacity of the
noble Athenians, who were men of instinct, like all noble men, and could
never give satisfactory answers concerning the motives of their actions?
In the end, however, though silently and secretly, he laughed also
at himself: with his finer conscience and introspection, he found
in himself the same difficulty and incapacity. "But why"--he said
to himself--"should one on that account separate oneself from the
instincts! One must set them right, and the reason ALSO--one must follow
the instincts, but at the same time persuade the reason to support them
with good arguments." This was the real FALSENESS of that great and
mysterious ironist; he brought his conscience up to the point that he
was satisfied with a kind of self-outwitting: in fact, he perceived
the irrationality in the moral judgment.--Plato, more innocent in such
matters, and without the craftiness of the plebeian, wished to prove to
himself, at the expenditure of all his strength--the greatest strength
a philosopher had ever expended--that reason and instinct lead
spontaneously to one goal, to the good, to "God"; and since Plato, all
theologians and philosophers have followed the same path--which means
that in matters of morality, instinct (or as Christians call it,
"Faith," or as I call it, "the herd") has hitherto triumphed. Unless
one should make an exception in the case of Descartes, the father of
rationalism (and consequently the grandfather of the Revolution), who
recognized only the authority of reason: but reason is only a tool, and
Descartes was superficial.

192. Whoever has followed the history of a single science, finds in
its development a clue to the understanding of the oldest and commonest
processes of all "knowledge and cognizance": there, as here, the
premature hypotheses, the fictions, the good stupid will to "belief,"
and the lack of distrust and patience are first developed--our senses
learn late, and never learn completely, to be subtle, reliable, and
cautious organs of knowledge. Our eyes find it easier on a given
occasion to produce a picture already often produced, than to seize upon
the divergence and novelty of an impression: the latter requires more
force, more "morality." It is difficult and painful for the ear to
listen to anything new; we hear strange music badly. When we hear
another language spoken, we involuntarily attempt to form the sounds
into words with which we are more familiar and conversant--it was thus,
for example, that the Germans modified the spoken word ARCUBALISTA into
ARMBRUST (cross-bow). Our senses are also hostile and averse to the
new; and generally, even in the "simplest" processes of sensation, the
emotions DOMINATE--such as fear, love, hatred, and the passive emotion
of indolence.--As little as a reader nowadays reads all the single words
(not to speak of syllables) of a page--he rather takes about five out
of every twenty words at random, and "guesses" the probably appropriate
sense to them--just as little do we see a tree correctly and completely
in respect to its leaves, branches, colour, and shape; we find it so
much easier to fancy the chance of a tree. Even in the midst of the
most remarkable experiences, we still do just the same; we fabricate the
greater part of the experience, and can hardly be made to contemplate
any event, EXCEPT as "inventors" thereof. All this goes to prove
that from our fundamental nature and from remote ages we have
been--ACCUSTOMED TO LYING. Or, to express it more politely and
hypocritically, in short, more pleasantly--one is much more of an artist
than one is aware of.--In an animated conversation, I often see the face
of the person with whom I am speaking so clearly and sharply defined
before me, according to the thought he expresses, or which I believe to
be evoked in his mind, that the degree of distinctness far exceeds the
STRENGTH of my visual faculty--the delicacy of the play of the muscles
and of the expression of the eyes MUST therefore be imagined by me.
Probably the person put on quite a different expression, or none at all.

193. Quidquid luce fuit, tenebris agit: but also contrariwise. What we
experience in dreams, provided we experience it often, pertains at
last just as much to the general belongings of our soul as anything
"actually" experienced; by virtue thereof we are richer or poorer, we
have a requirement more or less, and finally, in broad daylight, and
even in the brightest moments of our waking life, we are ruled to some
extent by the nature of our dreams. Supposing that someone has often
flown in his dreams, and that at last, as soon as he dreams, he is
conscious of the power and art of flying as his privilege and his
peculiarly enviable happiness; such a person, who believes that on the
slightest impulse, he can actualize all sorts of curves and angles, who
knows the sensation of a certain divine levity, an "upwards"
without effort or constraint, a "downwards" without descending
or lowering--without TROUBLE!--how could the man with such
dream-experiences and dream-habits fail to find "happiness" differently
coloured and defined, even in his waking hours! How could he fail--to
long DIFFERENTLY for happiness? "Flight," such as is described by poets,
must, when compared with his own "flying," be far too earthly, muscular,
violent, far too "troublesome" for him.

194. The difference among men does not manifest itself only in the
difference of their lists of desirable things--in their regarding
different good things as worth striving for, and being disagreed as to
the greater or less value, the order of rank, of the commonly recognized
desirable things:--it manifests itself much more in what they regard as
actually HAVING and POSSESSING a desirable thing. As regards a woman,
for instance, the control over her body and her sexual gratification
serves as an amply sufficient sign of ownership and possession to the
more modest man; another with a more suspicious and ambitious thirst for
possession, sees the "questionableness," the mere apparentness of such
ownership, and wishes to have finer tests in order to know especially
whether the woman not only gives herself to him, but also gives up for
his sake what she has or would like to have--only THEN does he look upon
her as "possessed." A third, however, has not even here got to the limit
of his distrust and his desire for possession: he asks himself whether
the woman, when she gives up everything for him, does not perhaps do
so for a phantom of him; he wishes first to be thoroughly, indeed,
profoundly well known; in order to be loved at all he ventures to let
himself be found out. Only then does he feel the beloved one fully in
his possession, when she no longer deceives herself about him, when
she loves him just as much for the sake of his devilry and concealed
insatiability, as for his goodness, patience, and spirituality. One
man would like to possess a nation, and he finds all the higher arts of
Cagliostro and Catalina suitable for his purpose. Another, with a more
refined thirst for possession, says to himself: "One may not deceive
where one desires to possess"--he is irritated and impatient at the idea
that a mask of him should rule in the hearts of the people: "I must,
therefore, MAKE myself known, and first of all learn to know myself!"
Among helpful and charitable people, one almost always finds the awkward
craftiness which first gets up suitably him who has to be helped, as
though, for instance, he should "merit" help, seek just THEIR help, and
would show himself deeply grateful, attached, and subservient to them
for all help. With these conceits, they take control of the needy as a
property, just as in general they are charitable and helpful out of a
desire for property. One finds them jealous when they are crossed or
forestalled in their charity. Parents involuntarily make something like
themselves out of their children--they call that "education"; no mother
doubts at the bottom of her heart that the child she has borne is
thereby her property, no father hesitates about his right to HIS OWN
ideas and notions of worth. Indeed, in former times fathers deemed it
right to use their discretion concerning the life or death of the newly
born (as among the ancient Germans). And like the father, so also do the
teacher, the class, the priest, and the prince still see in every new
individual an unobjectionable opportunity for a new possession. The
consequence is...

195. The Jews--a people "born for slavery," as Tacitus and the whole
ancient world say of them; "the chosen people among the nations," as
they themselves say and believe--the Jews performed the miracle of the
inversion of valuations, by means of which life on earth obtained a new
and dangerous charm for a couple of millenniums. Their prophets fused
into one the expressions "rich," "godless," "wicked," "violent,"
"sensual," and for the first time coined the word "world" as a term of
reproach. In this inversion of valuations (in which is also included
the use of the word "poor" as synonymous with "saint" and "friend") the
significance of the Jewish people is to be found; it is with THEM that
the SLAVE-INSURRECTION IN MORALS commences.

196. It is to be INFERRED that there are countless dark bodies near the
sun--such as we shall never see. Among ourselves, this is an allegory;
and the psychologist of morals reads the whole star-writing merely as an
allegorical and symbolic language in which much may be unexpressed.

197. The beast of prey and the man of prey (for instance, Caesar Borgia)
are fundamentally misunderstood, "nature" is misunderstood, so long as
one seeks a "morbidness" in the constitution of these healthiest of
all tropical monsters and growths, or even an innate "hell" in them--as
almost all moralists have done hitherto. Does it not seem that there is
a hatred of the virgin forest and of the tropics among moralists? And
that the "tropical man" must be discredited at all costs, whether
as disease and deterioration of mankind, or as his own hell and
self-torture? And why? In favour of the "temperate zones"? In favour
of the temperate men? The "moral"? The mediocre?--This for the chapter:
"Morals as Timidity."

198. All the systems of morals which address themselves with a view to
their "happiness," as it is called--what else are they but suggestions
for behaviour adapted to the degree of DANGER from themselves in which
the individuals live; recipes for their passions, their good and bad
propensities, insofar as such have the Will to Power and would like
to play the master; small and great expediencies and elaborations,
permeated with the musty odour of old family medicines and old-wife
wisdom; all of them grotesque and absurd in their form--because
they address themselves to "all," because they generalize where
generalization is not authorized; all of them speaking unconditionally,
and taking themselves unconditionally; all of them flavoured not merely
with one grain of salt, but rather endurable only, and sometimes even
seductive, when they are over-spiced and begin to smell dangerously,
especially of "the other world." That is all of little value when
estimated intellectually, and is far from being "science," much less
"wisdom"; but, repeated once more, and three times repeated, it is
expediency, expediency, expediency, mixed with stupidity, stupidity,
stupidity--whether it be the indifference and statuesque coldness
towards the heated folly of the emotions, which the Stoics advised and
fostered; or the no-more-laughing and no-more-weeping of Spinoza, the
destruction of the emotions by their analysis and vivisection, which he
recommended so naively; or the lowering of the emotions to an innocent
mean at which they may be satisfied, the Aristotelianism of morals;
or even morality as the enjoyment of the emotions in a voluntary
attenuation and spiritualization by the symbolism of art, perhaps as
music, or as love of God, and of mankind for God's sake--for in religion
the passions are once more enfranchised, provided that...; or, finally,
even the complaisant and wanton surrender to the emotions, as has
been taught by Hafis and Goethe, the bold letting-go of the reins, the
spiritual and corporeal licentia morum in the exceptional cases of
wise old codgers and drunkards, with whom it "no longer has much
danger."--This also for the chapter: "Morals as Timidity."

199. Inasmuch as in all ages, as long as mankind has existed, there have
also been human herds (family alliances, communities, tribes, peoples,
states, churches), and always a great number who obey in proportion
to the small number who command--in view, therefore, of the fact that
obedience has been most practiced and fostered among mankind hitherto,
one may reasonably suppose that, generally speaking, the need thereof is
now innate in every one, as a kind of FORMAL CONSCIENCE which gives
the command "Thou shalt unconditionally do something, unconditionally
refrain from something", in short, "Thou shalt". This need tries to
satisfy itself and to fill its form with a content, according to its
strength, impatience, and eagerness, it at once seizes as an omnivorous
appetite with little selection, and accepts whatever is shouted into
its ear by all sorts of commanders--parents, teachers, laws, class
prejudices, or public opinion. The extraordinary limitation of human
development, the hesitation, protractedness, frequent retrogression, and
turning thereof, is attributable to the fact that the herd-instinct of
obedience is transmitted best, and at the cost of the art of command. If
one imagine this instinct increasing to its greatest extent, commanders
and independent individuals will finally be lacking altogether, or they
will suffer inwardly from a bad conscience, and will have to impose
a deception on themselves in the first place in order to be able to
command just as if they also were only obeying. This condition of things
actually exists in Europe at present--I call it the moral hypocrisy of
the commanding class. They know no other way of protecting themselves
from their bad conscience than by playing the role of executors of older
and higher orders (of predecessors, of the constitution, of justice, of
the law, or of God himself), or they even justify themselves by maxims
from the current opinions of the herd, as "first servants of their
people," or "instruments of the public weal". On the other hand, the
gregarious European man nowadays assumes an air as if he were the only
kind of man that is allowable, he glorifies his qualities, such as
public spirit, kindness, deference, industry, temperance, modesty,
indulgence, sympathy, by virtue of which he is gentle, endurable, and
useful to the herd, as the peculiarly human virtues. In cases, however,
where it is believed that the leader and bell-wether cannot be dispensed
with, attempt after attempt is made nowadays to replace commanders
by the summing together of clever gregarious men all representative
constitutions, for example, are of this origin. In spite of all, what a
blessing, what a deliverance from a weight becoming unendurable, is the
appearance of an absolute ruler for these gregarious Europeans--of this
fact the effect of the appearance of Napoleon was the last great proof
the history of the influence of Napoleon is almost the history of
the higher happiness to which the entire century has attained in its
worthiest individuals and periods.

200. The man of an age of dissolution which mixes the races with
one another, who has the inheritance of a diversified descent in his
body--that is to say, contrary, and often not only contrary, instincts
and standards of value, which struggle with one another and are seldom
at peace--such a man of late culture and broken lights, will, on an
average, be a weak man. His fundamental desire is that the war which is
IN HIM should come to an end; happiness appears to him in the character
of a soothing medicine and mode of thought (for instance, Epicurean
or Christian); it is above all things the happiness of repose, of
undisturbedness, of repletion, of final unity--it is the "Sabbath of
Sabbaths," to use the expression of the holy rhetorician, St. Augustine,
who was himself such a man.--Should, however, the contrariety and
conflict in such natures operate as an ADDITIONAL incentive and stimulus
to life--and if, on the other hand, in addition to their powerful and
irreconcilable instincts, they have also inherited and indoctrinated
into them a proper mastery and subtlety for carrying on the conflict
with themselves (that is to say, the faculty of self-control and
self-deception), there then arise those marvelously incomprehensible and
inexplicable beings, those enigmatical men, predestined for conquering
and circumventing others, the finest examples of which are Alcibiades
and Caesar (with whom I should like to associate the FIRST of Europeans
according to my taste, the Hohenstaufen, Frederick the Second), and
among artists, perhaps Leonardo da Vinci. They appear precisely in the
same periods when that weaker type, with its longing for repose, comes
to the front; the two types are complementary to each other, and spring
from the same causes.

201. As long as the utility which determines moral estimates is only
gregarious utility, as long as the preservation of the community is only
kept in view, and the immoral is sought precisely and exclusively in
what seems dangerous to the maintenance of the community, there can be
no "morality of love to one's neighbour." Granted even that there is
already a little constant exercise of consideration, sympathy, fairness,
gentleness, and mutual assistance, granted that even in this condition
of society all those instincts are already active which are latterly
distinguished by honourable names as "virtues," and eventually almost
coincide with the conception "morality": in that period they do not
as yet belong to the domain of moral valuations--they are still
ULTRA-MORAL. A sympathetic action, for instance, is neither called good
nor bad, moral nor immoral, in the best period of the Romans; and should
it be praised, a sort of resentful disdain is compatible with this
praise, even at the best, directly the sympathetic action is compared
with one which contributes to the welfare of the whole, to the RES
PUBLICA. After all, "love to our neighbour" is always a secondary
matter, partly conventional and arbitrarily manifested in relation to
our FEAR OF OUR NEIGHBOUR. After the fabric of society seems on the
whole established and secured against external dangers, it is this
fear of our neighbour which again creates new perspectives of moral
valuation. Certain strong and dangerous instincts, such as the love of
enterprise, foolhardiness, revengefulness, astuteness, rapacity, and
love of power, which up till then had not only to be honoured from the
point of view of general utility--under other names, of course, than
those here given--but had to be fostered and cultivated (because they
were perpetually required in the common danger against the common
enemies), are now felt in their dangerousness to be doubly strong--when
the outlets for them are lacking--and are gradually branded as immoral
and given over to calumny. The contrary instincts and inclinations now
attain to moral honour, the gregarious instinct gradually draws its
conclusions. How much or how little dangerousness to the community or
to equality is contained in an opinion, a condition, an emotion, a
disposition, or an endowment--that is now the moral perspective, here
again fear is the mother of morals. It is by the loftiest and strongest
instincts, when they break out passionately and carry the individual
far above and beyond the average, and the low level of the gregarious
conscience, that the self-reliance of the community is destroyed, its
belief in itself, its backbone, as it were, breaks, consequently these
very instincts will be most branded and defamed. The lofty independent
spirituality, the will to stand alone, and even the cogent reason, are
felt to be dangers, everything that elevates the individual above the
herd, and is a source of fear to the neighbour, is henceforth called
EVIL, the tolerant, unassuming, self-adapting, self-equalizing
disposition, the MEDIOCRITY of desires, attains to moral distinction and
honour. Finally, under very peaceful circumstances, there is always
less opportunity and necessity for training the feelings to severity
and rigour, and now every form of severity, even in justice, begins
to disturb the conscience, a lofty and rigorous nobleness and
self-responsibility almost offends, and awakens distrust, "the lamb,"
and still more "the sheep," wins respect. There is a point of diseased
mellowness and effeminacy in the history of society, at which society
itself takes the part of him who injures it, the part of the CRIMINAL,
and does so, in fact, seriously and honestly. To punish, appears to it
to be somehow unfair--it is certain that the idea of "punishment" and
"the obligation to punish" are then painful and alarming to people. "Is
it not sufficient if the criminal be rendered HARMLESS? Why should we
still punish? Punishment itself is terrible!"--with these questions
gregarious morality, the morality of fear, draws its ultimate
conclusion. If one could at all do away with danger, the cause of fear,
one would have done away with this morality at the same time, it
would no longer be necessary, it WOULD NOT CONSIDER ITSELF any longer
necessary!--Whoever examines the conscience of the present-day European,
will always elicit the same imperative from its thousand moral folds
and hidden recesses, the imperative of the timidity of the herd "we wish
that some time or other there may be NOTHING MORE TO FEAR!" Some time
or other--the will and the way THERETO is nowadays called "progress" all
over Europe.

202. Let us at once say again what we have already said a hundred
times, for people's ears nowadays are unwilling to hear such truths--OUR
truths. We know well enough how offensive it sounds when any one
plainly, and without metaphor, counts man among the animals, but it will
be accounted to us almost a CRIME, that it is precisely in respect to
men of "modern ideas" that we have constantly applied the terms "herd,"
"herd-instincts," and such like expressions. What avail is it? We cannot
do otherwise, for it is precisely here that our new insight is. We
have found that in all the principal moral judgments, Europe has become
unanimous, including likewise the countries where European influence
prevails in Europe people evidently KNOW what Socrates thought he
did not know, and what the famous serpent of old once promised to
teach--they "know" today what is good and evil. It must then sound hard
and be distasteful to the ear, when we always insist that that which
here thinks it knows, that which here glorifies itself with praise
and blame, and calls itself good, is the instinct of the herding human
animal, the instinct which has come and is ever coming more and more
to the front, to preponderance and supremacy over other instincts,
according to the increasing physiological approximation and resemblance
of which it is the symptom. MORALITY IN EUROPE AT PRESENT IS
HERDING-ANIMAL MORALITY, and therefore, as we understand the matter,
only one kind of human morality, beside which, before which, and after
which many other moralities, and above all HIGHER moralities, are or
should be possible. Against such a "possibility," against such a "should
be," however, this morality defends itself with all its strength, it
says obstinately and inexorably "I am morality itself and nothing else
is morality!" Indeed, with the help of a religion which has humoured
and flattered the sublimest desires of the herding-animal, things have
reached such a point that we always find a more visible expression of
this morality even in political and social arrangements: the DEMOCRATIC
movement is the inheritance of the Christian movement. That its TEMPO,
however, is much too slow and sleepy for the more impatient ones, for
those who are sick and distracted by the herding-instinct, is indicated
by the increasingly furious howling, and always less disguised
teeth-gnashing of the anarchist dogs, who are now roving through the
highways of European culture. Apparently in opposition to the peacefully
industrious democrats and Revolution-ideologues, and still more so
to the awkward philosophasters and fraternity-visionaries who call
themselves Socialists and want a "free society," those are really at one
with them all in their thorough and instinctive hostility to every form
of society other than that of the AUTONOMOUS herd (to the extent even of
repudiating the notions "master" and "servant"--ni dieu ni maitre, says
a socialist formula); at one in their tenacious opposition to every
special claim, every special right and privilege (this means ultimately
opposition to EVERY right, for when all are equal, no one needs "rights"
any longer); at one in their distrust of punitive justice (as though it
were a violation of the weak, unfair to the NECESSARY consequences of
all former society); but equally at one in their religion of sympathy,
in their compassion for all that feels, lives, and suffers (down to the
very animals, up even to "God"--the extravagance of "sympathy for
God" belongs to a democratic age); altogether at one in the cry and
impatience of their sympathy, in their deadly hatred of suffering
generally, in their almost feminine incapacity for witnessing it or
ALLOWING it; at one in their involuntary beglooming and heart-softening,
under the spell of which Europe seems to be threatened with a new
Buddhism; at one in their belief in the morality of MUTUAL sympathy, as
though it were morality in itself, the climax, the ATTAINED climax of
mankind, the sole hope of the future, the consolation of the present,
the great discharge from all the obligations of the past; altogether at
one in their belief in the community as the DELIVERER, in the herd, and
therefore in "themselves."

203. We, who hold a different belief--we, who regard the democratic
movement, not only as a degenerating form of political organization, but
as equivalent to a degenerating, a waning type of man, as involving his
mediocrising and depreciation: where have WE to fix our hopes? In
NEW PHILOSOPHERS--there is no other alternative: in minds strong and
original enough to initiate opposite estimates of value, to transvalue
and invert "eternal valuations"; in forerunners, in men of the future,
who in the present shall fix the constraints and fasten the knots which
will compel millenniums to take NEW paths. To teach man the future
of humanity as his WILL, as depending on human will, and to make
preparation for vast hazardous enterprises and collective attempts in
rearing and educating, in order thereby to put an end to the frightful
rule of folly and chance which has hitherto gone by the name of
"history" (the folly of the "greatest number" is only its last
form)--for that purpose a new type of philosopher and commander will
some time or other be needed, at the very idea of which everything that
has existed in the way of occult, terrible, and benevolent beings might
look pale and dwarfed. The image of such leaders hovers before OUR
eyes:--is it lawful for me to say it aloud, ye free spirits? The
conditions which one would partly have to create and partly utilize for
their genesis; the presumptive methods and tests by virtue of which
a soul should grow up to such an elevation and power as to feel a
CONSTRAINT to these tasks; a transvaluation of values, under the new
pressure and hammer of which a conscience should be steeled and a heart
transformed into brass, so as to bear the weight of such responsibility;
and on the other hand the necessity for such leaders, the dreadful
danger that they might be lacking, or miscarry and degenerate:--these
are OUR real anxieties and glooms, ye know it well, ye free spirits!
these are the heavy distant thoughts and storms which sweep across the
heaven of OUR life. There are few pains so grievous as to have seen,
divined, or experienced how an exceptional man has missed his way and
deteriorated; but he who has the rare eye for the universal danger
of "man" himself DETERIORATING, he who like us has recognized the
extraordinary fortuitousness which has hitherto played its game in
respect to the future of mankind--a game in which neither the hand, nor
even a "finger of God" has participated!--he who divines the fate that
is hidden under the idiotic unwariness and blind confidence of
"modern ideas," and still more under the whole of Christo-European
morality--suffers from an anguish with which no other is to be compared.
He sees at a glance all that could still BE MADE OUT OF MAN through
a favourable accumulation and augmentation of human powers and
arrangements; he knows with all the knowledge of his conviction how
unexhausted man still is for the greatest possibilities, and how often
in the past the type man has stood in presence of mysterious decisions
and new paths:--he knows still better from his painfulest recollections
on what wretched obstacles promising developments of the highest rank
have hitherto usually gone to pieces, broken down, sunk, and become
contemptible. The UNIVERSAL DEGENERACY OF MANKIND to the level of
the "man of the future"--as idealized by the socialistic fools and
shallow-pates--this degeneracy and dwarfing of man to an absolutely
gregarious animal (or as they call it, to a man of "free society"),
this brutalizing of man into a pigmy with equal rights and claims, is
undoubtedly POSSIBLE! He who has thought out this possibility to its
ultimate conclusion knows ANOTHER loathing unknown to the rest of
mankind--and perhaps also a new MISSION!



CHAPTER VI. WE SCHOLARS


204. At the risk that moralizing may also reveal itself here as that
which it has always been--namely, resolutely MONTRER SES PLAIES,
according to Balzac--I would venture to protest against an improper and
injurious alteration of rank, which quite unnoticed, and as if with the
best conscience, threatens nowadays to establish itself in the relations
of science and philosophy. I mean to say that one must have the right
out of one's own EXPERIENCE--experience, as it seems to me, always
implies unfortunate experience?--to treat of such an important question
of rank, so as not to speak of colour like the blind, or AGAINST science
like women and artists ("Ah! this dreadful science!" sigh their instinct
and their shame, "it always FINDS THINGS OUT!"). The declaration of
independence of the scientific man, his emancipation from philosophy,
is one of the subtler after-effects of democratic organization and
disorganization: the self-glorification and self-conceitedness of
the learned man is now everywhere in full bloom, and in its best
springtime--which does not mean to imply that in this case self-praise
smells sweet. Here also the instinct of the populace cries, "Freedom
from all masters!" and after science has, with the happiest results,
resisted theology, whose "hand-maid" it had been too long, it now
proposes in its wantonness and indiscretion to lay down laws for
philosophy, and in its turn to play the "master"--what am I saying!
to play the PHILOSOPHER on its own account. My memory--the memory of
a scientific man, if you please!--teems with the naivetes of insolence
which I have heard about philosophy and philosophers from young
naturalists and old physicians (not to mention the most cultured and
most conceited of all learned men, the philologists and schoolmasters,
who are both the one and the other by profession). On one occasion it
was the specialist and the Jack Horner who instinctively stood on the
defensive against all synthetic tasks and capabilities; at another time
it was the industrious worker who had got a scent of OTIUM and refined
luxuriousness in the internal economy of the philosopher, and felt
himself aggrieved and belittled thereby. On another occasion it was the
colour-blindness of the utilitarian, who sees nothing in philosophy but
a series of REFUTED systems, and an extravagant expenditure which "does
nobody any good". At another time the fear of disguised mysticism and of
the boundary-adjustment of knowledge became conspicuous, at another
time the disregard of individual philosophers, which had involuntarily
extended to disregard of philosophy generally. In fine, I found most
frequently, behind the proud disdain of philosophy in young scholars,
the evil after-effect of some particular philosopher, to whom on the
whole obedience had been foresworn, without, however, the spell of his
scornful estimates of other philosophers having been got rid of--the
result being a general ill-will to all philosophy. (Such seems to
me, for instance, the after-effect of Schopenhauer on the most modern
Germany: by his unintelligent rage against Hegel, he has succeeded in
severing the whole of the last generation of Germans from its connection
with German culture, which culture, all things considered, has been
an elevation and a divining refinement of the HISTORICAL SENSE, but
precisely at this point Schopenhauer himself was poor, irreceptive,
and un-German to the extent of ingeniousness.) On the whole, speaking
generally, it may just have been the humanness, all-too-humanness of the
modern philosophers themselves, in short, their contemptibleness, which
has injured most radically the reverence for philosophy and opened the
doors to the instinct of the populace. Let it but be acknowledged to
what an extent our modern world diverges from the whole style of the
world of Heraclitus, Plato, Empedocles, and whatever else all the royal
and magnificent anchorites of the spirit were called, and with what
justice an honest man of science MAY feel himself of a better family and
origin, in view of such representatives of philosophy, who, owing to
the fashion of the present day, are just as much aloft as they are down
below--in Germany, for instance, the two lions of Berlin, the anarchist
Eugen Duhring and the amalgamist Eduard von Hartmann. It is especially
the sight of those hotch-potch philosophers, who call themselves
"realists," or "positivists," which is calculated to implant a
dangerous distrust in the soul of a young and ambitious scholar those
philosophers, at the best, are themselves but scholars and specialists,
that is very evident! All of them are persons who have been vanquished
and BROUGHT BACK AGAIN under the dominion of science, who at one time
or another claimed more from themselves, without having a right to the
"more" and its responsibility--and who now, creditably, rancorously, and
vindictively, represent in word and deed, DISBELIEF in the master-task
and supremacy of philosophy After all, how could it be otherwise?
Science flourishes nowadays and has the good conscience clearly visible
on its countenance, while that to which the entire modern philosophy has
gradually sunk, the remnant of philosophy of the present day, excites
distrust and displeasure, if not scorn and pity Philosophy reduced to
a "theory of knowledge," no more in fact than a diffident science of
epochs and doctrine of forbearance a philosophy that never even
gets beyond the threshold, and rigorously DENIES itself the right
to enter--that is philosophy in its last throes, an end, an agony,
something that awakens pity. How could such a philosophy--RULE!

205. The dangers that beset the evolution of the philosopher are, in
fact, so manifold nowadays, that one might doubt whether this fruit
could still come to maturity. The extent and towering structure of the
sciences have increased enormously, and therewith also the probability
that the philosopher will grow tired even as a learner, or will attach
himself somewhere and "specialize" so that he will no longer attain to
his elevation, that is to say, to his superspection, his circumspection,
and his DESPECTION. Or he gets aloft too late, when the best of his
maturity and strength is past, or when he is impaired, coarsened, and
deteriorated, so that his view, his general estimate of things, is no
longer of much importance. It is perhaps just the refinement of his
intellectual conscience that makes him hesitate and linger on the
way, he dreads the temptation to become a dilettante, a millepede, a
milleantenna, he knows too well that as a discerner, one who has lost
his self-respect no longer commands, no longer LEADS, unless he should
aspire to become a great play-actor, a philosophical Cagliostro and
spiritual rat-catcher--in short, a misleader. This is in the last
instance a question of taste, if it has not really been a question of
conscience. To double once more the philosopher's difficulties, there is
also the fact that he demands from himself a verdict, a Yea or Nay, not
concerning science, but concerning life and the worth of life--he learns
unwillingly to believe that it is his right and even his duty to obtain
this verdict, and he has to seek his way to the right and the belief
only through the most extensive (perhaps disturbing and destroying)
experiences, often hesitating, doubting, and dumbfounded. In fact, the
philosopher has long been mistaken and confused by the multitude, either
with the scientific man and ideal scholar, or with the religiously
elevated, desensualized, desecularized visionary and God-intoxicated
man; and even yet when one hears anybody praised, because he lives
"wisely," or "as a philosopher," it hardly means anything more than
"prudently and apart." Wisdom: that seems to the populace to be a kind
of flight, a means and artifice for withdrawing successfully from a
bad game; but the GENUINE philosopher--does it not seem so to US,
my friends?--lives "unphilosophically" and "unwisely," above all,
IMPRUDENTLY, and feels the obligation and burden of a hundred attempts
and temptations of life--he risks HIMSELF constantly, he plays THIS bad
game.

206. In relation to the genius, that is to say, a being who either
ENGENDERS or PRODUCES--both words understood in their fullest sense--the
man of learning, the scientific average man, has always something of
the old maid about him; for, like her, he is not conversant with the two
principal functions of man. To both, of course, to the scholar and
to the old maid, one concedes respectability, as if by way of
indemnification--in these cases one emphasizes the respectability--and
yet, in the compulsion of this concession, one has the same admixture
of vexation. Let us examine more closely: what is the scientific man?
Firstly, a commonplace type of man, with commonplace virtues: that is
to say, a non-ruling, non-authoritative, and non-self-sufficient type
of man; he possesses industry, patient adaptableness to rank and file,
equability and moderation in capacity and requirement; he has the
instinct for people like himself, and for that which they require--for
instance: the portion of independence and green meadow without which
there is no rest from labour, the claim to honour and consideration
(which first and foremost presupposes recognition and recognisability),
the sunshine of a good name, the perpetual ratification of his value and
usefulness, with which the inward DISTRUST which lies at the bottom of
the heart of all dependent men and gregarious animals, has again and
again to be overcome. The learned man, as is appropriate, has also
maladies and faults of an ignoble kind: he is full of petty envy, and
has a lynx-eye for the weak points in those natures to whose elevations
he cannot attain. He is confiding, yet only as one who lets himself go,
but does not FLOW; and precisely before the man of the great current he
stands all the colder and more reserved--his eye is then like a smooth
and irresponsive lake, which is no longer moved by rapture or sympathy.
The worst and most dangerous thing of which a scholar is capable results
from the instinct of mediocrity of his type, from the Jesuitism of
mediocrity, which labours instinctively for the destruction of
the exceptional man, and endeavours to break--or still better, to
relax--every bent bow To relax, of course, with consideration, and
naturally with an indulgent hand--to RELAX with confiding sympathy
that is the real art of Jesuitism, which has always understood how to
introduce itself as the religion of sympathy.

207. However gratefully one may welcome the OBJECTIVE spirit--and
who has not been sick to death of all subjectivity and its confounded
IPSISIMOSITY!--in the end, however, one must learn caution even with
regard to one's gratitude, and put a stop to the exaggeration with
which the unselfing and depersonalizing of the spirit has recently been
celebrated, as if it were the goal in itself, as if it were salvation
and glorification--as is especially accustomed to happen in the
pessimist school, which has also in its turn good reasons for paying the
highest honours to "disinterested knowledge" The objective man, who no
longer curses and scolds like the pessimist, the IDEAL man of learning
in whom the scientific instinct blossoms forth fully after a thousand
complete and partial failures, is assuredly one of the most costly
instruments that exist, but his place is in the hand of one who is more
powerful He is only an instrument, we may say, he is a MIRROR--he is no
"purpose in himself" The objective man is in truth a mirror accustomed
to prostration before everything that wants to be known, with such
desires only as knowing or "reflecting" implies--he waits until
something comes, and then expands himself sensitively, so that even the
light footsteps and gliding-past of spiritual beings may not be lost on
his surface and film Whatever "personality" he still possesses seems to
him accidental, arbitrary, or still oftener, disturbing, so much has he
come to regard himself as the passage and reflection of outside forms
and events He calls up the recollection of "himself" with an effort,
and not infrequently wrongly, he readily confounds himself with other
persons, he makes mistakes with regard to his own needs, and here only
is he unrefined and negligent Perhaps he is troubled about the health,
or the pettiness and confined atmosphere of wife and friend, or the lack
of companions and society--indeed, he sets himself to reflect on his
suffering, but in vain! His thoughts already rove away to the MORE
GENERAL case, and tomorrow he knows as little as he knew yesterday how
to help himself He does not now take himself seriously and devote time
to himself he is serene, NOT from lack of trouble, but from lack
of capacity for grasping and dealing with HIS trouble The habitual
complaisance with respect to all objects and experiences, the radiant
and impartial hospitality with which he receives everything that
comes his way, his habit of inconsiderate good-nature, of dangerous
indifference as to Yea and Nay: alas! there are enough of cases in which
he has to atone for these virtues of his!--and as man generally, he
becomes far too easily the CAPUT MORTUUM of such virtues. Should one
wish love or hatred from him--I mean love and hatred as God, woman, and
animal understand them--he will do what he can, and furnish what he can.
But one must not be surprised if it should not be much--if he should
show himself just at this point to be false, fragile, questionable, and
deteriorated. His love is constrained, his hatred is artificial, and
rather UN TOUR DE FORCE, a slight ostentation and exaggeration. He is
only genuine so far as he can be objective; only in his serene totality
is he still "nature" and "natural." His mirroring and eternally
self-polishing soul no longer knows how to affirm, no longer how to
deny; he does not command; neither does he destroy. "JE NE MEPRISE
PRESQUE RIEN"--he says, with Leibniz: let us not overlook nor undervalue
the PRESQUE! Neither is he a model man; he does not go in advance of any
one, nor after, either; he places himself generally too far off to have
any reason for espousing the cause of either good or evil. If he has
been so long confounded with the PHILOSOPHER, with the Caesarian trainer
and dictator of civilization, he has had far too much honour, and what
is more essential in him has been overlooked--he is an instrument,
something of a slave, though certainly the sublimest sort of slave, but
nothing in himself--PRESQUE RIEN! The objective man is an instrument,
a costly, easily injured, easily tarnished measuring instrument and
mirroring apparatus, which is to be taken care of and respected; but he
is no goal, not outgoing nor upgoing, no complementary man in whom the
REST of existence justifies itself, no termination--and still less a
commencement, an engendering, or primary cause, nothing hardy, powerful,
self-centred, that wants to be master; but rather only a soft, inflated,
delicate, movable potter's-form, that must wait for some kind of content
and frame to "shape" itself thereto--for the most part a man without
frame and content, a "selfless" man. Consequently, also, nothing for
women, IN PARENTHESI.

208. When a philosopher nowadays makes known that he is not a skeptic--I
hope that has been gathered from the foregoing description of the
objective spirit?--people all hear it impatiently; they regard him on
that account with some apprehension, they would like to ask so many,
many questions... indeed among timid hearers, of whom there are now so
many, he is henceforth said to be dangerous. With his repudiation of
skepticism, it seems to them as if they heard some evil-threatening
sound in the distance, as if a new kind of explosive were being tried
somewhere, a dynamite of the spirit, perhaps a newly discovered Russian
NIHILINE, a pessimism BONAE VOLUNTATIS, that not only denies, means
denial, but--dreadful thought! PRACTISES denial. Against this kind of
"good-will"--a will to the veritable, actual negation of life--there is,
as is generally acknowledged nowadays, no better soporific and sedative
than skepticism, the mild, pleasing, lulling poppy of skepticism;
and Hamlet himself is now prescribed by the doctors of the day as an
antidote to the "spirit," and its underground noises. "Are not our ears
already full of bad sounds?" say the skeptics, as lovers of repose, and
almost as a kind of safety police; "this subterranean Nay is terrible!
Be still, ye pessimistic moles!" The skeptic, in effect, that delicate
creature, is far too easily frightened; his conscience is schooled so
as to start at every Nay, and even at that sharp, decided Yea, and feels
something like a bite thereby. Yea! and Nay!--they seem to him opposed
to morality; he loves, on the contrary, to make a festival to his virtue
by a noble aloofness, while perhaps he says with Montaigne: "What do I
know?" Or with Socrates: "I know that I know nothing." Or: "Here I do
not trust myself, no door is open to me." Or: "Even if the door were
open, why should I enter immediately?" Or: "What is the use of any hasty
hypotheses? It might quite well be in good taste to make no hypotheses
at all. Are you absolutely obliged to straighten at once what is
crooked? to stuff every hole with some kind of oakum? Is there not time
enough for that? Has not the time leisure? Oh, ye demons, can ye not
at all WAIT? The uncertain also has its charms, the Sphinx, too, is a
Circe, and Circe, too, was a philosopher."--Thus does a skeptic console
himself; and in truth he needs some consolation. For skepticism is
the most spiritual expression of a certain many-sided physiological
temperament, which in ordinary language is called nervous debility and
sickliness; it arises whenever races or classes which have been long
separated, decisively and suddenly blend with one another. In the new
generation, which has inherited as it were different standards and
valuations in its blood, everything is disquiet, derangement, doubt, and
tentativeness; the best powers operate restrictively, the very virtues
prevent each other growing and becoming strong, equilibrium, ballast,
and perpendicular stability are lacking in body and soul. That, however,
which is most diseased and degenerated in such nondescripts is the
WILL; they are no longer familiar with independence of decision, or
the courageous feeling of pleasure in willing--they are doubtful of the
"freedom of the will" even in their dreams Our present-day Europe,
the scene of a senseless, precipitate attempt at a radical blending of
classes, and CONSEQUENTLY of races, is therefore skeptical in all its
heights and depths, sometimes exhibiting the mobile skepticism which
springs impatiently and wantonly from branch to branch, sometimes with
gloomy aspect, like a cloud over-charged with interrogative signs--and
often sick unto death of its will! Paralysis of will, where do we not
find this cripple sitting nowadays! And yet how bedecked oftentimes' How
seductively ornamented! There are the finest gala dresses and disguises
for this disease, and that, for instance, most of what places itself
nowadays in the show-cases as "objectiveness," "the scientific spirit,"
"L'ART POUR L'ART," and "pure voluntary knowledge," is only decked-out
skepticism and paralysis of will--I am ready to answer for this
diagnosis of the European disease--The disease of the will is diffused
unequally over Europe, it is worst and most varied where civilization
has longest prevailed, it decreases according as "the barbarian"
still--or again--asserts his claims under the loose drapery of Western
culture It is therefore in the France of today, as can be readily
disclosed and comprehended, that the will is most infirm, and France,
which has always had a masterly aptitude for converting even the
portentous crises of its spirit into something charming and seductive,
now manifests emphatically its intellectual ascendancy over Europe,
by being the school and exhibition of all the charms of skepticism The
power to will and to persist, moreover, in a resolution, is already
somewhat stronger in Germany, and again in the North of Germany it
is stronger than in Central Germany, it is considerably stronger in
England, Spain, and Corsica, associated with phlegm in the former and
with hard skulls in the latter--not to mention Italy, which is too young
yet to know what it wants, and must first show whether it can exercise
will, but it is strongest and most surprising of all in that immense
middle empire where Europe as it were flows back to Asia--namely, in
Russia There the power to will has been long stored up and accumulated,
there the will--uncertain whether to be negative or affirmative--waits
threateningly to be discharged (to borrow their pet phrase from our
physicists) Perhaps not only Indian wars and complications in Asia would
be necessary to free Europe from its greatest danger, but also internal
subversion, the shattering of the empire into small states, and above
all the introduction of parliamentary imbecility, together with the
obligation of every one to read his newspaper at breakfast I do not
say this as one who desires it, in my heart I should rather prefer the
contrary--I mean such an increase in the threatening attitude of
Russia, that Europe would have to make up its mind to become equally
threatening--namely, TO ACQUIRE ONE WILL, by means of a new caste to
rule over the Continent, a persistent, dreadful will of its own, that
can set its aims thousands of years ahead; so that the long spun-out
comedy of its petty-statism, and its dynastic as well as its democratic
many-willed-ness, might finally be brought to a close. The time for
petty politics is past; the next century will bring the struggle for the
dominion of the world--the COMPULSION to great politics.

209. As to how far the new warlike age on which we Europeans have
evidently entered may perhaps favour the growth of another and stronger
kind of skepticism, I should like to express myself preliminarily
merely by a parable, which the lovers of German history will already
understand. That unscrupulous enthusiast for big, handsome grenadiers
(who, as King of Prussia, brought into being a military and skeptical
genius--and therewith, in reality, the new and now triumphantly emerged
type of German), the problematic, crazy father of Frederick the Great,
had on one point the very knack and lucky grasp of the genius: he knew
what was then lacking in Germany, the want of which was a hundred times
more alarming and serious than any lack of culture and social form--his
ill-will to the young Frederick resulted from the anxiety of a profound
instinct. MEN WERE LACKING; and he suspected, to his bitterest regret,
that his own son was not man enough. There, however, he deceived
himself; but who would not have deceived himself in his place? He saw
his son lapsed to atheism, to the ESPRIT, to the pleasant frivolity of
clever Frenchmen--he saw in the background the great bloodsucker, the
spider skepticism; he suspected the incurable wretchedness of a heart no
longer hard enough either for evil or good, and of a broken will that no
longer commands, is no longer ABLE to command. Meanwhile, however,
there grew up in his son that new kind of harder and more dangerous
skepticism--who knows TO WHAT EXTENT it was encouraged just by
his father's hatred and the icy melancholy of a will condemned to
solitude?--the skepticism of daring manliness, which is closely related
to the genius for war and conquest, and made its first entrance into
Germany in the person of the great Frederick. This skepticism despises
and nevertheless grasps; it undermines and takes possession; it does
not believe, but it does not thereby lose itself; it gives the spirit a
dangerous liberty, but it keeps strict guard over the heart. It is the
GERMAN form of skepticism, which, as a continued Fredericianism, risen
to the highest spirituality, has kept Europe for a considerable time
under the dominion of the German spirit and its critical and historical
distrust Owing to the insuperably strong and tough masculine character
of the great German philologists and historical critics (who,
rightly estimated, were also all of them artists of destruction
and dissolution), a NEW conception of the German spirit gradually
established itself--in spite of all Romanticism in music and
philosophy--in which the leaning towards masculine skepticism was
decidedly prominent whether, for instance, as fearlessness of gaze, as
courage and sternness of the dissecting hand, or as resolute will to
dangerous voyages of discovery, to spiritualized North Pole expeditions
under barren and dangerous skies. There may be good grounds for it when
warm-blooded and superficial humanitarians cross themselves before this
spirit, CET ESPRIT FATALISTE, IRONIQUE, MEPHISTOPHELIQUE, as Michelet
calls it, not without a shudder. But if one would realize how
characteristic is this fear of the "man" in the German spirit which
awakened Europe out of its "dogmatic slumber," let us call to mind the
former conception which had to be overcome by this new one--and that
it is not so very long ago that a masculinized woman could dare, with
unbridled presumption, to recommend the Germans to the interest of
Europe as gentle, good-hearted, weak-willed, and poetical fools.
Finally, let us only understand profoundly enough Napoleon's
astonishment when he saw Goethe it reveals what had been regarded for
centuries as the "German spirit" "VOILA UN HOMME!"--that was as much as
to say "But this is a MAN! And I only expected to see a German!"

210. Supposing, then, that in the picture of the philosophers of the
future, some trait suggests the question whether they must not perhaps
be skeptics in the last-mentioned sense, something in them would only be
designated thereby--and not they themselves. With equal right they might
call themselves critics, and assuredly they will be men of experiments.
By the name with which I ventured to baptize them, I have already
expressly emphasized their attempting and their love of attempting is
this because, as critics in body and soul, they will love to make use
of experiments in a new, and perhaps wider and more dangerous sense? In
their passion for knowledge, will they have to go further in daring and
painful attempts than the sensitive and pampered taste of a democratic
century can approve of?--There is no doubt these coming ones will be
least able to dispense with the serious and not unscrupulous qualities
which distinguish the critic from the skeptic I mean the certainty as to
standards of worth, the conscious employment of a unity of method,
the wary courage, the standing-alone, and the capacity for
self-responsibility, indeed, they will avow among themselves a DELIGHT
in denial and dissection, and a certain considerate cruelty, which knows
how to handle the knife surely and deftly, even when the heart bleeds
They will be STERNER (and perhaps not always towards themselves only)
than humane people may desire, they will not deal with the "truth" in
order that it may "please" them, or "elevate" and "inspire" them--they
will rather have little faith in "TRUTH" bringing with it such revels
for the feelings. They will smile, those rigorous spirits, when any one
says in their presence "That thought elevates me, why should it not be
true?" or "That work enchants me, why should it not be beautiful?" or
"That artist enlarges me, why should he not be great?" Perhaps they
will not only have a smile, but a genuine disgust for all that is thus
rapturous, idealistic, feminine, and hermaphroditic, and if any one
could look into their inmost hearts, he would not easily find therein
the intention to reconcile "Christian sentiments" with "antique taste,"
or even with "modern parliamentarism" (the kind of reconciliation
necessarily found even among philosophers in our very uncertain and
consequently very conciliatory century). Critical discipline, and every
habit that conduces to purity and rigour in intellectual matters,
will not only be demanded from themselves by these philosophers of
the future, they may even make a display thereof as their special
adornment--nevertheless they will not want to be called critics on that
account. It will seem to them no small indignity to philosophy to
have it decreed, as is so welcome nowadays, that "philosophy itself is
criticism and critical science--and nothing else whatever!" Though this
estimate of philosophy may enjoy the approval of all the Positivists of
France and Germany (and possibly it even flattered the heart and taste
of KANT: let us call to mind the titles of his principal works), our new
philosophers will say, notwithstanding, that critics are instruments of
the philosopher, and just on that account, as instruments, they are
far from being philosophers themselves! Even the great Chinaman of
Konigsberg was only a great critic.

211. I insist upon it that people finally cease confounding
philosophical workers, and in general scientific men, with
philosophers--that precisely here one should strictly give "each his
own," and not give those far too much, these far too little. It may
be necessary for the education of the real philosopher that he himself
should have once stood upon all those steps upon which his servants,
the scientific workers of philosophy, remain standing, and MUST remain
standing he himself must perhaps have been critic, and dogmatist,
and historian, and besides, poet, and collector, and traveler, and
riddle-reader, and moralist, and seer, and "free spirit," and almost
everything, in order to traverse the whole range of human values
and estimations, and that he may BE ABLE with a variety of eyes and
consciences to look from a height to any distance, from a depth up
to any height, from a nook into any expanse. But all these are only
preliminary conditions for his task; this task itself demands something
else--it requires him TO CREATE VALUES. The philosophical workers, after
the excellent pattern of Kant and Hegel, have to fix and formalize some
great existing body of valuations--that is to say, former DETERMINATIONS
OF VALUE, creations of value, which have become prevalent, and are for
a time called "truths"--whether in the domain of the LOGICAL, the
POLITICAL (moral), or the ARTISTIC. It is for these investigators to
make whatever has happened and been esteemed hitherto, conspicuous,
conceivable, intelligible, and manageable, to shorten everything long,
even "time" itself, and to SUBJUGATE the entire past: an immense and
wonderful task, in the carrying out of which all refined pride, all
tenacious will, can surely find satisfaction. THE REAL PHILOSOPHERS,
HOWEVER, ARE COMMANDERS AND LAW-GIVERS; they say: "Thus SHALL it be!"
They determine first the Whither and the Why of mankind, and thereby
set aside the previous labour of all philosophical workers, and all
subjugators of the past--they grasp at the future with a creative
hand, and whatever is and was, becomes for them thereby a means, an
instrument, and a hammer. Their "knowing" is CREATING, their creating
is a law-giving, their will to truth is--WILL TO POWER.--Are there at
present such philosophers? Have there ever been such philosophers? MUST
there not be such philosophers some day? ...

212. It is always more obvious to me that the philosopher, as a man
INDISPENSABLE for the morrow and the day after the morrow, has ever
found himself, and HAS BEEN OBLIGED to find himself, in contradiction
to the day in which he lives; his enemy has always been the ideal of his
day. Hitherto all those extraordinary furtherers of humanity whom one
calls philosophers--who rarely regarded themselves as lovers of wisdom,
but rather as disagreeable fools and dangerous interrogators--have found
their mission, their hard, involuntary, imperative mission (in the end,
however, the greatness of their mission), in being the bad conscience of
their age. In putting the vivisector's knife to the breast of the very
VIRTUES OF THEIR AGE, they have betrayed their own secret; it has been
for the sake of a NEW greatness of man, a new untrodden path to
his aggrandizement. They have always disclosed how much hypocrisy,
indolence, self-indulgence, and self-neglect, how much falsehood was
concealed under the most venerated types of contemporary morality, how
much virtue was OUTLIVED, they have always said "We must remove hence to
where YOU are least at home" In the face of a world of "modern ideas,"
which would like to confine every one in a corner, in a "specialty," a
philosopher, if there could be philosophers nowadays, would be compelled
to place the greatness of man, the conception of "greatness," precisely
in his comprehensiveness and multifariousness, in his all-roundness, he
would even determine worth and rank according to the amount and variety
of that which a man could bear and take upon himself, according to the
EXTENT to which a man could stretch his responsibility Nowadays the
taste and virtue of the age weaken and attenuate the will, nothing is
so adapted to the spirit of the age as weakness of will consequently, in
the ideal of the philosopher, strength of will, sternness, and capacity
for prolonged resolution, must specially be included in the conception
of "greatness", with as good a right as the opposite doctrine, with its
ideal of a silly, renouncing, humble, selfless humanity, was suited to
an opposite age--such as the sixteenth century, which suffered from its
accumulated energy of will, and from the wildest torrents and floods
of selfishness In the time of Socrates, among men only of worn-out
instincts, old conservative Athenians who let themselves go--"for the
sake of happiness," as they said, for the sake of pleasure, as their
conduct indicated--and who had continually on their lips the old pompous
words to which they had long forfeited the right by the life they led,
IRONY was perhaps necessary for greatness of soul, the wicked Socratic
assurance of the old physician and plebeian, who cut ruthlessly into his
own flesh, as into the flesh and heart of the "noble," with a look that
said plainly enough "Do not dissemble before me! here--we are equal!"
At present, on the contrary, when throughout Europe the herding-animal
alone attains to honours, and dispenses honours, when "equality of
right" can too readily be transformed into equality in wrong--I mean to
say into general war against everything rare, strange, and privileged,
against the higher man, the higher soul, the higher duty, the higher
responsibility, the creative plenipotence and lordliness--at present
it belongs to the conception of "greatness" to be noble, to wish to be
apart, to be capable of being different, to stand alone, to have to live
by personal initiative, and the philosopher will betray something of his
own ideal when he asserts "He shall be the greatest who can be the most
solitary, the most concealed, the most divergent, the man beyond good
and evil, the master of his virtues, and of super-abundance of will;
precisely this shall be called GREATNESS: as diversified as can be
entire, as ample as can be full." And to ask once more the question: Is
greatness POSSIBLE--nowadays?

213. It is difficult to learn what a philosopher is, because it cannot
be taught: one must "know" it by experience--or one should have the
pride NOT to know it. The fact that at present people all talk of things
of which they CANNOT have any experience, is true more especially
and unfortunately as concerns the philosopher and philosophical
matters:--the very few know them, are permitted to know them, and
all popular ideas about them are false. Thus, for instance, the truly
philosophical combination of a bold, exuberant spirituality which runs
at presto pace, and a dialectic rigour and necessity which makes no
false step, is unknown to most thinkers and scholars from their own
experience, and therefore, should any one speak of it in their
presence, it is incredible to them. They conceive of every necessity as
troublesome, as a painful compulsory obedience and state of constraint;
thinking itself is regarded by them as something slow and hesitating,
almost as a trouble, and often enough as "worthy of the SWEAT of the
noble"--but not at all as something easy and divine, closely related
to dancing and exuberance! "To think" and to take a matter "seriously,"
"arduously"--that is one and the same thing to them; such only has been
their "experience."--Artists have here perhaps a finer intuition; they
who know only too well that precisely when they no longer do anything
"arbitrarily," and everything of necessity, their feeling of freedom,
of subtlety, of power, of creatively fixing, disposing, and shaping,
reaches its climax--in short, that necessity and "freedom of will" are
then the same thing with them. There is, in fine, a gradation of rank
in psychical states, to which the gradation of rank in the problems
corresponds; and the highest problems repel ruthlessly every one who
ventures too near them, without being predestined for their solution
by the loftiness and power of his spirituality. Of what use is it for
nimble, everyday intellects, or clumsy, honest mechanics and empiricists
to press, in their plebeian ambition, close to such problems, and as
it were into this "holy of holies"--as so often happens nowadays! But
coarse feet must never tread upon such carpets: this is provided for in
the primary law of things; the doors remain closed to those intruders,
though they may dash and break their heads thereon. People have always
to be born to a high station, or, more definitely, they have to be BRED
for it: a person has only a right to philosophy--taking the word in
its higher significance--in virtue of his descent; the ancestors, the
"blood," decide here also. Many generations must have prepared the way
for the coming of the philosopher; each of his virtues must have been
separately acquired, nurtured, transmitted, and embodied; not only the
bold, easy, delicate course and current of his thoughts, but above all
the readiness for great responsibilities, the majesty of ruling glance
and contemning look, the feeling of separation from the multitude with
their duties and virtues, the kindly patronage and defense of whatever
is misunderstood and calumniated, be it God or devil, the delight and
practice of supreme justice, the art of commanding, the amplitude of
will, the lingering eye which rarely admires, rarely looks up, rarely
loves....



CHAPTER VII. OUR VIRTUES


214. OUR Virtues?--It is probable that we, too, have still our virtues,
although naturally they are not those sincere and massive virtues on
account of which we hold our grandfathers in esteem and also at a little
distance from us. We Europeans of the day after tomorrow, we firstlings
of the twentieth century--with all our dangerous curiosity, our
multifariousness and art of disguising, our mellow and seemingly
sweetened cruelty in sense and spirit--we shall presumably, IF we must
have virtues, have those only which have come to agreement with our most
secret and heartfelt inclinations, with our most ardent requirements:
well, then, let us look for them in our labyrinths!--where, as we know,
so many things lose themselves, so many things get quite lost! And is
there anything finer than to SEARCH for one's own virtues? Is it not
almost to BELIEVE in one's own virtues? But this "believing in one's
own virtues"--is it not practically the same as what was formerly called
one's "good conscience," that long, respectable pigtail of an idea,
which our grandfathers used to hang behind their heads, and often enough
also behind their understandings? It seems, therefore, that however
little we may imagine ourselves to be old-fashioned and grandfatherly
respectable in other respects, in one thing we are nevertheless the
worthy grandchildren of our grandfathers, we last Europeans with good
consciences: we also still wear their pigtail.--Ah! if you only knew how
soon, so very soon--it will be different!

215. As in the stellar firmament there are sometimes two suns which
determine the path of one planet, and in certain cases suns of different
colours shine around a single planet, now with red light, now with
green, and then simultaneously illumine and flood it with motley
colours: so we modern men, owing to the complicated mechanism of our
"firmament," are determined by DIFFERENT moralities; our actions shine
alternately in different colours, and are seldom unequivocal--and there
are often cases, also, in which our actions are MOTLEY-COLOURED.

216. To love one's enemies? I think that has been well learnt: it takes
place thousands of times at present on a large and small scale; indeed,
at times the higher and sublimer thing takes place:--we learn to DESPISE
when we love, and precisely when we love best; all of it, however,
unconsciously, without noise, without ostentation, with the shame and
secrecy of goodness, which forbids the utterance of the pompous word
and the formula of virtue. Morality as attitude--is opposed to our taste
nowadays. This is ALSO an advance, as it was an advance in our fathers
that religion as an attitude finally became opposed to their taste,
including the enmity and Voltairean bitterness against religion (and all
that formerly belonged to freethinker-pantomime). It is the music in our
conscience, the dance in our spirit, to which Puritan litanies, moral
sermons, and goody-goodness won't chime.

217. Let us be careful in dealing with those who attach great importance
to being credited with moral tact and subtlety in moral discernment!
They never forgive us if they have once made a mistake BEFORE us
(or even with REGARD to us)--they inevitably become our instinctive
calumniators and detractors, even when they still remain our
"friends."--Blessed are the forgetful: for they "get the better" even of
their blunders.

218. The psychologists of France--and where else are there still
psychologists nowadays?--have never yet exhausted their bitter and
manifold enjoyment of the betise bourgeoise, just as though... in
short, they betray something thereby. Flaubert, for instance, the honest
citizen of Rouen, neither saw, heard, nor tasted anything else in the
end; it was his mode of self-torment and refined cruelty. As this is
growing wearisome, I would now recommend for a change something else
for a pleasure--namely, the unconscious astuteness with which good, fat,
honest mediocrity always behaves towards loftier spirits and the tasks
they have to perform, the subtle, barbed, Jesuitical astuteness, which
is a thousand times subtler than the taste and understanding of the
middle-class in its best moments--subtler even than the understanding of
its victims:--a repeated proof that "instinct" is the most intelligent
of all kinds of intelligence which have hitherto been discovered. In
short, you psychologists, study the philosophy of the "rule" in its
struggle with the "exception": there you have a spectacle fit for Gods
and godlike malignity! Or, in plainer words, practise vivisection on
"good people," on the "homo bonae voluntatis," ON YOURSELVES!

219. The practice of judging and condemning morally, is the favourite
revenge of the intellectually shallow on those who are less so, it is
also a kind of indemnity for their being badly endowed by nature,
and finally, it is an opportunity for acquiring spirit and BECOMING
subtle--malice spiritualises. They are glad in their inmost heart that
there is a standard according to which those who are over-endowed with
intellectual goods and privileges, are equal to them, they contend for
the "equality of all before God," and almost NEED the belief in God for
this purpose. It is among them that the most powerful antagonists of
atheism are found. If any one were to say to them "A lofty spirituality
is beyond all comparison with the honesty and respectability of a merely
moral man"--it would make them furious, I shall take care not to say
so. I would rather flatter them with my theory that lofty spirituality
itself exists only as the ultimate product of moral qualities, that it
is a synthesis of all qualities attributed to the "merely moral" man,
after they have been acquired singly through long training and practice,
perhaps during a whole series of generations, that lofty spirituality
is precisely the spiritualising of justice, and the beneficent severity
which knows that it is authorized to maintain GRADATIONS OF RANK in the
world, even among things--and not only among men.

220. Now that the praise of the "disinterested person" is so popular
one must--probably not without some danger--get an idea of WHAT people
actually take an interest in, and what are the things generally which
fundamentally and profoundly concern ordinary men--including the
cultured, even the learned, and perhaps philosophers also, if
appearances do not deceive. The fact thereby becomes obvious that the
greater part of what interests and charms higher natures, and more
refined and fastidious tastes, seems absolutely "uninteresting" to
the average man--if, notwithstanding, he perceive devotion to these
interests, he calls it desinteresse, and wonders how it is possible to
act "disinterestedly." There have been philosophers who could give this
popular astonishment a seductive and mystical, other-worldly expression
(perhaps because they did not know the higher nature by experience?),
instead of stating the naked and candidly reasonable truth that
"disinterested" action is very interesting and "interested" action,
provided that... "And love?"--What! Even an action for love's sake
shall be "unegoistic"? But you fools--! "And the praise of the
self-sacrificer?"--But whoever has really offered sacrifice knows that
he wanted and obtained something for it--perhaps something from himself
for something from himself; that he relinquished here in order to have
more there, perhaps in general to be more, or even feel himself "more."
But this is a realm of questions and answers in which a more fastidious
spirit does not like to stay: for here truth has to stifle her yawns so
much when she is obliged to answer. And after all, truth is a woman; one
must not use force with her.

221. "It sometimes happens," said a moralistic pedant and
trifle-retailer, "that I honour and respect an unselfish man: not,
however, because he is unselfish, but because I think he has a right to
be useful to another man at his own expense. In short, the question
is always who HE is, and who THE OTHER is. For instance, in a person
created and destined for command, self-denial and modest retirement,
instead of being virtues, would be the waste of virtues: so it seems
to me. Every system of unegoistic morality which takes itself
unconditionally and appeals to every one, not only sins against good
taste, but is also an incentive to sins of omission, an ADDITIONAL
seduction under the mask of philanthropy--and precisely a seduction and
injury to the higher, rarer, and more privileged types of men. Moral
systems must be compelled first of all to bow before the GRADATIONS OF
RANK; their presumption must be driven home to their conscience--until
they thoroughly understand at last that it is IMMORAL to say that 'what
is right for one is proper for another.'"--So said my moralistic pedant
and bonhomme. Did he perhaps deserve to be laughed at when he thus
exhorted systems of morals to practise morality? But one should not be
too much in the right if one wishes to have the laughers on ONE'S OWN
side; a grain of wrong pertains even to good taste.

222. Wherever sympathy (fellow-suffering) is preached nowadays--and,
if I gather rightly, no other religion is any longer preached--let the
psychologist have his ears open through all the vanity, through all the
noise which is natural to these preachers (as to all preachers), he will
hear a hoarse, groaning, genuine note of SELF-CONTEMPT. It belongs
to the overshadowing and uglifying of Europe, which has been on
the increase for a century (the first symptoms of which are already
specified documentarily in a thoughtful letter of Galiani to Madame
d'Epinay)--IF IT IS NOT REALLY THE CAUSE THEREOF! The man of
"modern ideas," the conceited ape, is excessively dissatisfied with
himself--this is perfectly certain. He suffers, and his vanity wants him
only "to suffer with his fellows."

223. The hybrid European--a tolerably ugly plebeian, taken all in
all--absolutely requires a costume: he needs history as a storeroom
of costumes. To be sure, he notices that none of the costumes fit him
properly--he changes and changes. Let us look at the nineteenth century
with respect to these hasty preferences and changes in its masquerades
of style, and also with respect to its moments of desperation on account
of "nothing suiting" us. It is in vain to get ourselves up as romantic,
or classical, or Christian, or Florentine, or barocco, or "national,"
in moribus et artibus: it does not "clothe us"! But the "spirit,"
especially the "historical spirit," profits even by this desperation:
once and again a new sample of the past or of the foreign is tested,
put on, taken off, packed up, and above all studied--we are the first
studious age in puncto of "costumes," I mean as concerns morals,
articles of belief, artistic tastes, and religions; we are prepared as
no other age has ever been for a carnival in the grand style, for the
most spiritual festival--laughter and arrogance, for the transcendental
height of supreme folly and Aristophanic ridicule of the world. Perhaps
we are still discovering the domain of our invention just here, the
domain where even we can still be original, probably as parodists of
the world's history and as God's Merry-Andrews,--perhaps, though nothing
else of the present have a future, our laughter itself may have a
future!

224. The historical sense (or the capacity for divining quickly
the order of rank of the valuations according to which a people, a
community, or an individual has lived, the "divining instinct" for the
relationships of these valuations, for the relation of the authority
of the valuations to the authority of the operating forces),--this
historical sense, which we Europeans claim as our specialty, has come
to us in the train of the enchanting and mad semi-barbarity into which
Europe has been plunged by the democratic mingling of classes and
races--it is only the nineteenth century that has recognized this
faculty as its sixth sense. Owing to this mingling, the past of every
form and mode of life, and of cultures which were formerly closely
contiguous and superimposed on one another, flows forth into us "modern
souls"; our instincts now run back in all directions, we ourselves are
a kind of chaos: in the end, as we have said, the spirit perceives its
advantage therein. By means of our semi-barbarity in body and in desire,
we have secret access everywhere, such as a noble age never had; we have
access above all to the labyrinth of imperfect civilizations, and to
every form of semi-barbarity that has at any time existed on earth; and
in so far as the most considerable part of human civilization hitherto
has just been semi-barbarity, the "historical sense" implies almost the
sense and instinct for everything, the taste and tongue for everything:
whereby it immediately proves itself to be an IGNOBLE sense. For
instance, we enjoy Homer once more: it is perhaps our happiest
acquisition that we know how to appreciate Homer, whom men of
distinguished culture (as the French of the seventeenth century, like
Saint-Evremond, who reproached him for his ESPRIT VASTE, and even
Voltaire, the last echo of the century) cannot and could not so easily
appropriate--whom they scarcely permitted themselves to enjoy. The very
decided Yea and Nay of their palate, their promptly ready disgust, their
hesitating reluctance with regard to everything strange, their horror of
the bad taste even of lively curiosity, and in general the averseness of
every distinguished and self-sufficing culture to avow a new desire,
a dissatisfaction with its own condition, or an admiration of what is
strange: all this determines and disposes them unfavourably even towards
the best things of the world which are not their property or could not
become their prey--and no faculty is more unintelligible to such men
than just this historical sense, with its truckling, plebeian
curiosity. The case is not different with Shakespeare, that marvelous
Spanish-Moorish-Saxon synthesis of taste, over whom an ancient Athenian
of the circle of AEschylus would have half-killed himself with laughter
or irritation: but we--accept precisely this wild motleyness, this
medley of the most delicate, the most coarse, and the most artificial,
with a secret confidence and cordiality; we enjoy it as a refinement
of art reserved expressly for us, and allow ourselves to be as little
disturbed by the repulsive fumes and the proximity of the English
populace in which Shakespeare's art and taste lives, as perhaps on
the Chiaja of Naples, where, with all our senses awake, we go our way,
enchanted and voluntarily, in spite of the drain-odour of the lower
quarters of the town. That as men of the "historical sense" we have
our virtues, is not to be disputed:--we are unpretentious, unselfish,
modest, brave, habituated to self-control and self-renunciation, very
grateful, very patient, very complaisant--but with all this we are
perhaps not very "tasteful." Let us finally confess it, that what is
most difficult for us men of the "historical sense" to grasp, feel,
taste, and love, what finds us fundamentally prejudiced and almost
hostile, is precisely the perfection and ultimate maturity in every
culture and art, the essentially noble in works and men, their moment
of smooth sea and halcyon self-sufficiency, the goldenness and coldness
which all things show that have perfected themselves. Perhaps our great
virtue of the historical sense is in necessary contrast to GOOD taste,
at least to the very bad taste; and we can only evoke in ourselves
imperfectly, hesitatingly, and with compulsion the small, short, and
happy godsends and glorifications of human life as they shine here and
there: those moments and marvelous experiences when a great power has
voluntarily come to a halt before the boundless and infinite,--when a
super-abundance of refined delight has been enjoyed by a sudden checking
and petrifying, by standing firmly and planting oneself fixedly on still
trembling ground. PROPORTIONATENESS is strange to us, let us confess it
to ourselves; our itching is really the itching for the infinite, the
immeasurable. Like the rider on his forward panting horse, we let the
reins fall before the infinite, we modern men, we semi-barbarians--and
are only in OUR highest bliss when we--ARE IN MOST DANGER.

225. Whether it be hedonism, pessimism, utilitarianism, or eudaemonism,
all those modes of thinking which measure the worth of things according
to PLEASURE and PAIN, that is, according to accompanying circumstances
and secondary considerations, are plausible modes of thought and
naivetes, which every one conscious of CREATIVE powers and an artist's
conscience will look down upon with scorn, though not without sympathy.
Sympathy for you!--to be sure, that is not sympathy as you understand
it: it is not sympathy for social "distress," for "society" with its
sick and misfortuned, for the hereditarily vicious and defective who lie
on the ground around us; still less is it sympathy for the grumbling,
vexed, revolutionary slave-classes who strive after power--they call it
"freedom." OUR sympathy is a loftier and further-sighted sympathy:--we
see how MAN dwarfs himself, how YOU dwarf him! and there are moments
when we view YOUR sympathy with an indescribable anguish, when we resist
it,--when we regard your seriousness as more dangerous than any kind
of levity. You want, if possible--and there is not a more foolish "if
possible"--TO DO AWAY WITH SUFFERING; and we?--it really seems that WE
would rather have it increased and made worse than it has ever been!
Well-being, as you understand it--is certainly not a goal; it seems
to us an END; a condition which at once renders man ludicrous and
contemptible--and makes his destruction DESIRABLE! The discipline
of suffering, of GREAT suffering--know ye not that it is only THIS
discipline that has produced all the elevations of humanity hitherto?
The tension of soul in misfortune which communicates to it its energy,
its shuddering in view of rack and ruin, its inventiveness and bravery
in undergoing, enduring, interpreting, and exploiting misfortune, and
whatever depth, mystery, disguise, spirit, artifice, or greatness has
been bestowed upon the soul--has it not been bestowed through suffering,
through the discipline of great suffering? In man CREATURE and CREATOR
are united: in man there is not only matter, shred, excess, clay, mire,
folly, chaos; but there is also the creator, the sculptor, the hardness
of the hammer, the divinity of the spectator, and the seventh day--do
ye understand this contrast? And that YOUR sympathy for the "creature
in man" applies to that which has to be fashioned, bruised, forged,
stretched, roasted, annealed, refined--to that which must necessarily
SUFFER, and IS MEANT to suffer? And our sympathy--do ye not understand
what our REVERSE sympathy applies to, when it resists your sympathy as
the worst of all pampering and enervation?--So it is sympathy AGAINST
sympathy!--But to repeat it once more, there are higher problems than
the problems of pleasure and pain and sympathy; and all systems of
philosophy which deal only with these are naivetes.

226. WE IMMORALISTS.--This world with which WE are concerned, in which
we have to fear and love, this almost invisible, inaudible world of
delicate command and delicate obedience, a world of "almost" in every
respect, captious, insidious, sharp, and tender--yes, it is well
protected from clumsy spectators and familiar curiosity! We are
woven into a strong net and garment of duties, and CANNOT disengage
ourselves--precisely here, we are "men of duty," even we! Occasionally,
it is true, we dance in our "chains" and betwixt our "swords"; it
is none the less true that more often we gnash our teeth under the
circumstances, and are impatient at the secret hardship of our lot. But
do what we will, fools and appearances say of us: "These are men WITHOUT
duty,"--we have always fools and appearances against us!

227. Honesty, granting that it is the virtue of which we cannot rid
ourselves, we free spirits--well, we will labour at it with all our
perversity and love, and not tire of "perfecting" ourselves in OUR
virtue, which alone remains: may its glance some day overspread like
a gilded, blue, mocking twilight this aging civilization with its dull
gloomy seriousness! And if, nevertheless, our honesty should one day
grow weary, and sigh, and stretch its limbs, and find us too hard, and
would fain have it pleasanter, easier, and gentler, like an agreeable
vice, let us remain HARD, we latest Stoics, and let us send to its
help whatever devilry we have in us:--our disgust at the clumsy
and undefined, our "NITIMUR IN VETITUM," our love of adventure,
our sharpened and fastidious curiosity, our most subtle, disguised,
intellectual Will to Power and universal conquest, which rambles and
roves avidiously around all the realms of the future--let us go with all
our "devils" to the help of our "God"! It is probable that people will
misunderstand and mistake us on that account: what does it matter! They
will say: "Their 'honesty'--that is their devilry, and nothing else!"
What does it matter! And even if they were right--have not all Gods
hitherto been such sanctified, re-baptized devils? And after all, what
do we know of ourselves? And what the spirit that leads us wants TO BE
CALLED? (It is a question of names.) And how many spirits we harbour?
Our honesty, we free spirits--let us be careful lest it become our
vanity, our ornament and ostentation, our limitation, our stupidity!
Every virtue inclines to stupidity, every stupidity to virtue; "stupid
to the point of sanctity," they say in Russia,--let us be careful lest
out of pure honesty we eventually become saints and bores! Is not life
a hundred times too short for us--to bore ourselves? One would have to
believe in eternal life in order to...

228. I hope to be forgiven for discovering that all moral philosophy
hitherto has been tedious and has belonged to the soporific
appliances--and that "virtue," in my opinion, has been MORE injured
by the TEDIOUSNESS of its advocates than by anything else; at the same
time, however, I would not wish to overlook their general usefulness. It
is desirable that as few people as possible should reflect upon morals,
and consequently it is very desirable that morals should not some day
become interesting! But let us not be afraid! Things still remain today
as they have always been: I see no one in Europe who has (or DISCLOSES)
an idea of the fact that philosophizing concerning morals might be
conducted in a dangerous, captious, and ensnaring manner--that CALAMITY
might be involved therein. Observe, for example, the indefatigable,
inevitable English utilitarians: how ponderously and respectably they
stalk on, stalk along (a Homeric metaphor expresses it better) in the
footsteps of Bentham, just as he had already stalked in the footsteps of
the respectable Helvetius! (no, he was not a dangerous man, Helvetius,
CE SENATEUR POCOCURANTE, to use an expression of Galiani). No new
thought, nothing of the nature of a finer turning or better expression
of an old thought, not even a proper history of what has been previously
thought on the subject: an IMPOSSIBLE literature, taking it all in all,
unless one knows how to leaven it with some mischief. In effect, the
old English vice called CANT, which is MORAL TARTUFFISM, has insinuated
itself also into these moralists (whom one must certainly read with an
eye to their motives if one MUST read them), concealed this time under
the new form of the scientific spirit; moreover, there is not absent
from them a secret struggle with the pangs of conscience, from which a
race of former Puritans must naturally suffer, in all their scientific
tinkering with morals. (Is not a moralist the opposite of a Puritan?
That is to say, as a thinker who regards morality as questionable,
as worthy of interrogation, in short, as a problem? Is moralizing
not-immoral?) In the end, they all want English morality to be
recognized as authoritative, inasmuch as mankind, or the "general
utility," or "the happiness of the greatest number,"--no! the happiness
of ENGLAND, will be best served thereby. They would like, by all means,
to convince themselves that the striving after English happiness, I
mean after COMFORT and FASHION (and in the highest instance, a seat in
Parliament), is at the same time the true path of virtue; in fact, that
in so far as there has been virtue in the world hitherto, it has
just consisted in such striving. Not one of those ponderous,
conscience-stricken herding-animals (who undertake to advocate the
cause of egoism as conducive to the general welfare) wants to have
any knowledge or inkling of the facts that the "general welfare" is
no ideal, no goal, no notion that can be at all grasped, but is only a
nostrum,--that what is fair to one MAY NOT at all be fair to another,
that the requirement of one morality for all is really a detriment to
higher men, in short, that there is a DISTINCTION OF RANK between man
and man, and consequently between morality and morality. They are an
unassuming and fundamentally mediocre species of men, these utilitarian
Englishmen, and, as already remarked, in so far as they are tedious, one
cannot think highly enough of their utility. One ought even to ENCOURAGE
them, as has been partially attempted in the following rhymes:--

    Hail, ye worthies, barrow-wheeling,
    "Longer--better," aye revealing,

    Stiffer aye in head and knee;
    Unenraptured, never jesting,
    Mediocre everlasting,

    SANS GENIE ET SANS ESPRIT!


229. In these later ages, which may be proud of their humanity, there
still remains so much fear, so much SUPERSTITION of the fear, of the
"cruel wild beast," the mastering of which constitutes the very pride of
these humaner ages--that even obvious truths, as if by the agreement
of centuries, have long remained unuttered, because they have the
appearance of helping the finally slain wild beast back to life again.
I perhaps risk something when I allow such a truth to escape; let
others capture it again and give it so much "milk of pious sentiment"
[FOOTNOTE: An expression from Schiller's William Tell, Act IV, Scene
3.] to drink, that it will lie down quiet and forgotten, in its old
corner.--One ought to learn anew about cruelty, and open one's eyes;
one ought at last to learn impatience, in order that such immodest
gross errors--as, for instance, have been fostered by ancient and
modern philosophers with regard to tragedy--may no longer wander about
virtuously and boldly. Almost everything that we call "higher culture"
is based upon the spiritualising and intensifying of CRUELTY--this is
my thesis; the "wild beast" has not been slain at all, it lives, it
flourishes, it has only been--transfigured. That which constitutes the
painful delight of tragedy is cruelty; that which operates agreeably in
so-called tragic sympathy, and at the basis even of everything sublime,
up to the highest and most delicate thrills of metaphysics, obtains its
sweetness solely from the intermingled ingredient of cruelty. What the
Roman enjoys in the arena, the Christian in the ecstasies of the cross,
the Spaniard at the sight of the faggot and stake, or of the bull-fight,
the present-day Japanese who presses his way to the tragedy, the workman
of the Parisian suburbs who has a homesickness for bloody revolutions,
the Wagnerienne who, with unhinged will, "undergoes" the performance of
"Tristan and Isolde"--what all these enjoy, and strive with mysterious
ardour to drink in, is the philtre of the great Circe "cruelty." Here,
to be sure, we must put aside entirely the blundering psychology of
former times, which could only teach with regard to cruelty that
it originated at the sight of the suffering of OTHERS: there is an
abundant, super-abundant enjoyment even in one's own suffering, in
causing one's own suffering--and wherever man has allowed himself to be
persuaded to self-denial in the RELIGIOUS sense, or to self-mutilation,
as among the Phoenicians and ascetics, or in general, to
desensualisation, decarnalisation, and contrition, to Puritanical
repentance-spasms, to vivisection of conscience and to Pascal-like
SACRIFIZIA DELL' INTELLETO, he is secretly allured and impelled
forwards by his cruelty, by the dangerous thrill of cruelty TOWARDS
HIMSELF.--Finally, let us consider that even the seeker of knowledge
operates as an artist and glorifier of cruelty, in that he compels his
spirit to perceive AGAINST its own inclination, and often enough against
the wishes of his heart:--he forces it to say Nay, where he would like
to affirm, love, and adore; indeed, every instance of taking a thing
profoundly and fundamentally, is a violation, an intentional injuring
of the fundamental will of the spirit, which instinctively aims at
appearance and superficiality,--even in every desire for knowledge there
is a drop of cruelty.

230. Perhaps what I have said here about a "fundamental will of the
spirit" may not be understood without further details; I may be allowed
a word of explanation.--That imperious something which is popularly
called "the spirit," wishes to be master internally and externally,
and to feel itself master; it has the will of a multiplicity for a
simplicity, a binding, taming, imperious, and essentially ruling will.
Its requirements and capacities here, are the same as those assigned by
physiologists to everything that lives, grows, and multiplies. The power
of the spirit to appropriate foreign elements reveals itself in a strong
tendency to assimilate the new to the old, to simplify the manifold,
to overlook or repudiate the absolutely contradictory; just as it
arbitrarily re-underlines, makes prominent, and falsifies for itself
certain traits and lines in the foreign elements, in every portion of
the "outside world." Its object thereby is the incorporation of new
"experiences," the assortment of new things in the old arrangements--in
short, growth; or more properly, the FEELING of growth, the feeling of
increased power--is its object. This same will has at its service an
apparently opposed impulse of the spirit, a suddenly adopted preference
of ignorance, of arbitrary shutting out, a closing of windows, an inner
denial of this or that, a prohibition to approach, a sort of defensive
attitude against much that is knowable, a contentment with obscurity,
with the shutting-in horizon, an acceptance and approval of ignorance:
as that which is all necessary according to the degree of its
appropriating power, its "digestive power," to speak figuratively (and
in fact "the spirit" resembles a stomach more than anything else). Here
also belong an occasional propensity of the spirit to let itself be
deceived (perhaps with a waggish suspicion that it is NOT so and so,
but is only allowed to pass as such), a delight in uncertainty and
ambiguity, an exulting enjoyment of arbitrary, out-of-the-way narrowness
and mystery, of the too-near, of the foreground, of the magnified,
the diminished, the misshapen, the beautified--an enjoyment of the
arbitrariness of all these manifestations of power. Finally, in this
connection, there is the not unscrupulous readiness of the spirit to
deceive other spirits and dissemble before them--the constant pressing
and straining of a creating, shaping, changeable power: the spirit
enjoys therein its craftiness and its variety of disguises, it enjoys
also its feeling of security therein--it is precisely by its Protean
arts that it is best protected and concealed!--COUNTER TO this
propensity for appearance, for simplification, for a disguise, for a
cloak, in short, for an outside--for every outside is a cloak--there
operates the sublime tendency of the man of knowledge, which takes, and
INSISTS on taking things profoundly, variously, and thoroughly; as a
kind of cruelty of the intellectual conscience and taste, which every
courageous thinker will acknowledge in himself, provided, as it ought
to be, that he has sharpened and hardened his eye sufficiently long for
introspection, and is accustomed to severe discipline and even severe
words. He will say: "There is something cruel in the tendency of my
spirit": let the virtuous and amiable try to convince him that it is not
so! In fact, it would sound nicer, if, instead of our cruelty, perhaps
our "extravagant honesty" were talked about, whispered about, and
glorified--we free, VERY free spirits--and some day perhaps SUCH will
actually be our--posthumous glory! Meanwhile--for there is plenty of
time until then--we should be least inclined to deck ourselves out in
such florid and fringed moral verbiage; our whole former work has
just made us sick of this taste and its sprightly exuberance. They are
beautiful, glistening, jingling, festive words: honesty, love of truth,
love of wisdom, sacrifice for knowledge, heroism of the truthful--there
is something in them that makes one's heart swell with pride. But we
anchorites and marmots have long ago persuaded ourselves in all the
secrecy of an anchorite's conscience, that this worthy parade of
verbiage also belongs to the old false adornment, frippery, and
gold-dust of unconscious human vanity, and that even under such
flattering colour and repainting, the terrible original text HOMO NATURA
must again be recognized. In effect, to translate man back again into
nature; to master the many vain and visionary interpretations and
subordinate meanings which have hitherto been scratched and daubed over
the eternal original text, HOMO NATURA; to bring it about that man shall
henceforth stand before man as he now, hardened by the discipline
of science, stands before the OTHER forms of nature, with fearless
Oedipus-eyes, and stopped Ulysses-ears, deaf to the enticements of old
metaphysical bird-catchers, who have piped to him far too long: "Thou
art more! thou art higher! thou hast a different origin!"--this may be
a strange and foolish task, but that it is a TASK, who can deny! Why did
we choose it, this foolish task? Or, to put the question differently:
"Why knowledge at all?" Every one will ask us about this. And thus
pressed, we, who have asked ourselves the question a hundred times, have
not found and cannot find any better answer....

231. Learning alters us, it does what all nourishment does that does not
merely "conserve"--as the physiologist knows. But at the bottom of our
souls, quite "down below," there is certainly something unteachable,
a granite of spiritual fate, of predetermined decision and answer to
predetermined, chosen questions. In each cardinal problem there speaks
an unchangeable "I am this"; a thinker cannot learn anew about man and
woman, for instance, but can only learn fully--he can only follow to the
end what is "fixed" about them in himself. Occasionally we find certain
solutions of problems which make strong beliefs for us; perhaps they
are henceforth called "convictions." Later on--one sees in them only
footsteps to self-knowledge, guide-posts to the problem which we
ourselves ARE--or more correctly to the great stupidity which we embody,
our spiritual fate, the UNTEACHABLE in us, quite "down below."--In view
of this liberal compliment which I have just paid myself, permission
will perhaps be more readily allowed me to utter some truths about
"woman as she is," provided that it is known at the outset how literally
they are merely--MY truths.

232. Woman wishes to be independent, and therefore she begins to
enlighten men about "woman as she is"--THIS is one of the worst
developments of the general UGLIFYING of Europe. For what must these
clumsy attempts of feminine scientificality and self-exposure bring
to light! Woman has so much cause for shame; in woman there is so
much pedantry, superficiality, schoolmasterliness, petty presumption,
unbridledness, and indiscretion concealed--study only woman's behaviour
towards children!--which has really been best restrained and dominated
hitherto by the FEAR of man. Alas, if ever the "eternally tedious in
woman"--she has plenty of it!--is allowed to venture forth! if she
begins radically and on principle to unlearn her wisdom and art-of
charming, of playing, of frightening away sorrow, of alleviating and
taking easily; if she forgets her delicate aptitude for agreeable
desires! Female voices are already raised, which, by Saint Aristophanes!
make one afraid:--with medical explicitness it is stated in a
threatening manner what woman first and last REQUIRES from man. Is
it not in the very worst taste that woman thus sets herself up to be
scientific? Enlightenment hitherto has fortunately been men's affair,
men's gift--we remained therewith "among ourselves"; and in the end,
in view of all that women write about "woman," we may well have
considerable doubt as to whether woman really DESIRES enlightenment
about herself--and CAN desire it. If woman does not thereby seek a new
ORNAMENT for herself--I believe ornamentation belongs to the eternally
feminine?--why, then, she wishes to make herself feared: perhaps she
thereby wishes to get the mastery. But she does not want truth--what
does woman care for truth? From the very first, nothing is more foreign,
more repugnant, or more hostile to woman than truth--her great art is
falsehood, her chief concern is appearance and beauty. Let us confess
it, we men: we honour and love this very art and this very instinct in
woman: we who have the hard task, and for our recreation gladly seek the
company of beings under whose hands, glances, and delicate follies, our
seriousness, our gravity, and profundity appear almost like follies to
us. Finally, I ask the question: Did a woman herself ever acknowledge
profundity in a woman's mind, or justice in a woman's heart? And is it
not true that on the whole "woman" has hitherto been most despised by
woman herself, and not at all by us?--We men desire that woman should
not continue to compromise herself by enlightening us; just as it was
man's care and the consideration for woman, when the church decreed:
mulier taceat in ecclesia. It was to the benefit of woman when Napoleon
gave the too eloquent Madame de Stael to understand: mulier taceat in
politicis!--and in my opinion, he is a true friend of woman who calls
out to women today: mulier taceat de mulierel.

233. It betrays corruption of the instincts--apart from the fact that
it betrays bad taste--when a woman refers to Madame Roland, or Madame de
Stael, or Monsieur George Sand, as though something were proved thereby
in favour of "woman as she is." Among men, these are the three comical
women as they are--nothing more!--and just the best involuntary
counter-arguments against feminine emancipation and autonomy.

234. Stupidity in the kitchen; woman as cook; the terrible
thoughtlessness with which the feeding of the family and the master of
the house is managed! Woman does not understand what food means, and she
insists on being cook! If woman had been a thinking creature, she should
certainly, as cook for thousands of years, have discovered the most
important physiological facts, and should likewise have got possession
of the healing art! Through bad female cooks--through the entire lack
of reason in the kitchen--the development of mankind has been longest
retarded and most interfered with: even today matters are very little
better. A word to High School girls.

235. There are turns and casts of fancy, there are sentences, little
handfuls of words, in which a whole culture, a whole society suddenly
crystallises itself. Among these is the incidental remark of Madame de
Lambert to her son: "MON AMI, NE VOUS PERMETTEZ JAMAIS QUE DES FOLIES,
QUI VOUS FERONT GRAND PLAISIR"--the motherliest and wisest remark, by
the way, that was ever addressed to a son.

236. I have no doubt that every noble woman will oppose what Dante and
Goethe believed about woman--the former when he sang, "ELLA GUARDAVA
SUSO, ED IO IN LEI," and the latter when he interpreted it, "the
eternally feminine draws us ALOFT"; for THIS is just what she believes
of the eternally masculine.

237.

SEVEN APOPHTHEGMS FOR WOMEN

How the longest ennui flees, When a man comes to our knees!

Age, alas! and science staid, Furnish even weak virtue aid.

Sombre garb and silence meet: Dress for every dame--discreet.

Whom I thank when in my bliss? God!--and my good tailoress!

Young, a flower-decked cavern home; Old, a dragon thence doth roam.

Noble title, leg that's fine, Man as well: Oh, were HE mine!

Speech in brief and sense in mass--Slippery for the jenny-ass!

237A. Woman has hitherto been treated by men like birds, which, losing
their way, have come down among them from an elevation: as something
delicate, fragile, wild, strange, sweet, and animating--but as something
also which must be cooped up to prevent it flying away.

238. To be mistaken in the fundamental problem of "man and woman," to
deny here the profoundest antagonism and the necessity for an eternally
hostile tension, to dream here perhaps of equal rights, equal
training, equal claims and obligations: that is a TYPICAL sign of
shallow-mindedness; and a thinker who has proved himself shallow at
this dangerous spot--shallow in instinct!--may generally be regarded as
suspicious, nay more, as betrayed, as discovered; he will probably prove
too "short" for all fundamental questions of life, future as well as
present, and will be unable to descend into ANY of the depths. On the
other hand, a man who has depth of spirit as well as of desires, and
has also the depth of benevolence which is capable of severity and
harshness, and easily confounded with them, can only think of woman as
ORIENTALS do: he must conceive of her as a possession, as confinable
property, as a being predestined for service and accomplishing her
mission therein--he must take his stand in this matter upon the immense
rationality of Asia, upon the superiority of the instinct of Asia, as
the Greeks did formerly; those best heirs and scholars of Asia--who,
as is well known, with their INCREASING culture and amplitude of power,
from Homer to the time of Pericles, became gradually STRICTER towards
woman, in short, more Oriental. HOW necessary, HOW logical, even HOW
humanely desirable this was, let us consider for ourselves!

239. The weaker sex has in no previous age been treated with so
much respect by men as at present--this belongs to the tendency and
fundamental taste of democracy, in the same way as disrespectfulness to
old age--what wonder is it that abuse should be immediately made of
this respect? They want more, they learn to make claims, the tribute
of respect is at last felt to be well-nigh galling; rivalry for rights,
indeed actual strife itself, would be preferred: in a word, woman is
losing modesty. And let us immediately add that she is also losing
taste. She is unlearning to FEAR man: but the woman who "unlearns to
fear" sacrifices her most womanly instincts. That woman should venture
forward when the fear-inspiring quality in man--or more definitely,
the MAN in man--is no longer either desired or fully developed, is
reasonable enough and also intelligible enough; what is more difficult
to understand is that precisely thereby--woman deteriorates. This is
what is happening nowadays: let us not deceive ourselves about it!
Wherever the industrial spirit has triumphed over the military
and aristocratic spirit, woman strives for the economic and legal
independence of a clerk: "woman as clerkess" is inscribed on the portal
of the modern society which is in course of formation. While she
thus appropriates new rights, aspires to be "master," and inscribes
"progress" of woman on her flags and banners, the very opposite realises
itself with terrible obviousness: WOMAN RETROGRADES. Since the French
Revolution the influence of woman in Europe has DECLINED in proportion
as she has increased her rights and claims; and the "emancipation of
woman," insofar as it is desired and demanded by women themselves (and
not only by masculine shallow-pates), thus proves to be a remarkable
symptom of the increased weakening and deadening of the most womanly
instincts. There is STUPIDITY in this movement, an almost masculine
stupidity, of which a well-reared woman--who is always a sensible
woman--might be heartily ashamed. To lose the intuition as to the ground
upon which she can most surely achieve victory; to neglect exercise in
the use of her proper weapons; to let-herself-go before man, perhaps
even "to the book," where formerly she kept herself in control and in
refined, artful humility; to neutralize with her virtuous audacity man's
faith in a VEILED, fundamentally different ideal in woman, something
eternally, necessarily feminine; to emphatically and loquaciously
dissuade man from the idea that woman must be preserved, cared for,
protected, and indulged, like some delicate, strangely wild, and
often pleasant domestic animal; the clumsy and indignant collection of
everything of the nature of servitude and bondage which the position of
woman in the hitherto existing order of society has entailed and still
entails (as though slavery were a counter-argument, and not rather a
condition of every higher culture, of every elevation of culture):--what
does all this betoken, if not a disintegration of womanly instincts,
a defeminising? Certainly, there are enough of idiotic friends and
corrupters of woman among the learned asses of the masculine sex, who
advise woman to defeminize herself in this manner, and to imitate
all the stupidities from which "man" in Europe, European "manliness,"
suffers,--who would like to lower woman to "general culture," indeed
even to newspaper reading and meddling with politics. Here and there
they wish even to make women into free spirits and literary workers: as
though a woman without piety would not be something perfectly obnoxious
or ludicrous to a profound and godless man;--almost everywhere her
nerves are being ruined by the most morbid and dangerous kind of music
(our latest German music), and she is daily being made more hysterical
and more incapable of fulfilling her first and last function, that of
bearing robust children. They wish to "cultivate" her in general still
more, and intend, as they say, to make the "weaker sex" STRONG by
culture: as if history did not teach in the most emphatic manner that
the "cultivating" of mankind and his weakening--that is to say, the
weakening, dissipating, and languishing of his FORCE OF WILL--have
always kept pace with one another, and that the most powerful and
influential women in the world (and lastly, the mother of Napoleon)
had just to thank their force of will--and not their schoolmasters--for
their power and ascendancy over men. That which inspires respect
in woman, and often enough fear also, is her NATURE, which is more
"natural" than that of man, her genuine, carnivora-like, cunning
flexibility, her tiger-claws beneath the glove, her NAIVETE in egoism,
her untrainableness and innate wildness, the incomprehensibleness,
extent, and deviation of her desires and virtues. That which, in spite
of fear, excites one's sympathy for the dangerous and beautiful cat,
"woman," is that she seems more afflicted, more vulnerable, more
necessitous of love, and more condemned to disillusionment than any
other creature. Fear and sympathy it is with these feelings that man has
hitherto stood in the presence of woman, always with one foot already in
tragedy, which rends while it delights--What? And all that is now to
be at an end? And the DISENCHANTMENT of woman is in progress? The
tediousness of woman is slowly evolving? Oh Europe! Europe! We know
the horned animal which was always most attractive to thee, from which
danger is ever again threatening thee! Thy old fable might once more
become "history"--an immense stupidity might once again overmaster
thee and carry thee away! And no God concealed beneath it--no! only an
"idea," a "modern idea"!



CHAPTER VIII. PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES


240. I HEARD, once again for the first time, Richard Wagner's overture
to the Mastersinger: it is a piece of magnificent, gorgeous, heavy,
latter-day art, which has the pride to presuppose two centuries of music
as still living, in order that it may be understood:--it is an honour
to Germans that such a pride did not miscalculate! What flavours
and forces, what seasons and climes do we not find mingled in it! It
impresses us at one time as ancient, at another time as foreign, bitter,
and too modern, it is as arbitrary as it is pompously traditional, it
is not infrequently roguish, still oftener rough and coarse--it has fire
and courage, and at the same time the loose, dun-coloured skin of fruits
which ripen too late. It flows broad and full: and suddenly there is a
moment of inexplicable hesitation, like a gap that opens between cause
and effect, an oppression that makes us dream, almost a nightmare; but
already it broadens and widens anew, the old stream of delight--the most
manifold delight,--of old and new happiness; including ESPECIALLY
the joy of the artist in himself, which he refuses to conceal, his
astonished, happy cognizance of his mastery of the expedients here
employed, the new, newly acquired, imperfectly tested expedients of art
which he apparently betrays to us. All in all, however, no beauty, no
South, nothing of the delicate southern clearness of the sky, nothing
of grace, no dance, hardly a will to logic; a certain clumsiness even,
which is also emphasized, as though the artist wished to say to us: "It
is part of my intention"; a cumbersome drapery, something arbitrarily
barbaric and ceremonious, a flirring of learned and venerable conceits
and witticisms; something German in the best and worst sense of
the word, something in the German style, manifold, formless, and
inexhaustible; a certain German potency and super-plenitude of
soul, which is not afraid to hide itself under the RAFFINEMENTS of
decadence--which, perhaps, feels itself most at ease there; a real,
genuine token of the German soul, which is at the same time young and
aged, too ripe and yet still too rich in futurity. This kind of music
expresses best what I think of the Germans: they belong to the day
before yesterday and the day after tomorrow--THEY HAVE AS YET NO TODAY.

241. We "good Europeans," we also have hours when we allow ourselves a
warm-hearted patriotism, a plunge and relapse into old loves and narrow
views--I have just given an example of it--hours of national excitement,
of patriotic anguish, and all other sorts of old-fashioned floods of
sentiment. Duller spirits may perhaps only get done with what confines
its operations in us to hours and plays itself out in hours--in a
considerable time: some in half a year, others in half a lifetime,
according to the speed and strength with which they digest and "change
their material." Indeed, I could think of sluggish, hesitating races,
which even in our rapidly moving Europe, would require half a century
ere they could surmount such atavistic attacks of patriotism and
soil-attachment, and return once more to reason, that is to say, to
"good Europeanism." And while digressing on this possibility, I
happen to become an ear-witness of a conversation between two old
patriots--they were evidently both hard of hearing and consequently
spoke all the louder. "HE has as much, and knows as much, philosophy as
a peasant or a corps-student," said the one--"he is still innocent. But
what does that matter nowadays! It is the age of the masses: they lie on
their belly before everything that is massive. And so also in politicis.
A statesman who rears up for them a new Tower of Babel, some monstrosity
of empire and power, they call 'great'--what does it matter that we more
prudent and conservative ones do not meanwhile give up the old belief
that it is only the great thought that gives greatness to an action or
affair. Supposing a statesman were to bring his people into the position
of being obliged henceforth to practise 'high politics,' for which they
were by nature badly endowed and prepared, so that they would have
to sacrifice their old and reliable virtues, out of love to a new and
doubtful mediocrity;--supposing a statesman were to condemn his people
generally to 'practise politics,' when they have hitherto had something
better to do and think about, and when in the depths of their souls
they have been unable to free themselves from a prudent loathing of
the restlessness, emptiness, and noisy wranglings of the essentially
politics-practising nations;--supposing such a statesman were to
stimulate the slumbering passions and avidities of his people, were to
make a stigma out of their former diffidence and delight in aloofness,
an offence out of their exoticism and hidden permanency, were to
depreciate their most radical proclivities, subvert their consciences,
make their minds narrow, and their tastes 'national'--what! a statesman
who should do all this, which his people would have to do penance for
throughout their whole future, if they had a future, such a statesman
would be GREAT, would he?"--"Undoubtedly!" replied the other old patriot
vehemently, "otherwise he COULD NOT have done it! It was mad perhaps to
wish such a thing! But perhaps everything great has been just as mad
at its commencement!"--"Misuse of words!" cried his interlocutor,
contradictorily--"strong! strong! Strong and mad! NOT great!"--The old
men had obviously become heated as they thus shouted their "truths" in
each other's faces, but I, in my happiness and apartness, considered how
soon a stronger one may become master of the strong, and also that
there is a compensation for the intellectual superficialising of a
nation--namely, in the deepening of another.

242. Whether we call it "civilization," or "humanising," or "progress,"
which now distinguishes the European, whether we call it simply, without
praise or blame, by the political formula the DEMOCRATIC movement in
Europe--behind all the moral and political foregrounds pointed to by
such formulas, an immense PHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESS goes on, which is ever
extending the process of the assimilation of Europeans, their
increasing detachment from the conditions under which, climatically and
hereditarily, united races originate, their increasing independence of
every definite milieu, that for centuries would fain inscribe itself
with equal demands on soul and body,--that is to say, the slow emergence
of an essentially SUPER-NATIONAL and nomadic species of man, who
possesses, physiologically speaking, a maximum of the art and power
of adaptation as his typical distinction. This process of the EVOLVING
EUROPEAN, which can be retarded in its TEMPO by great relapses, but
will perhaps just gain and grow thereby in vehemence and depth--the
still-raging storm and stress of "national sentiment" pertains to it,
and also the anarchism which is appearing at present--this process
will probably arrive at results on which its naive propagators and
panegyrists, the apostles of "modern ideas," would least care to reckon.
The same new conditions under which on an average a levelling and
mediocrising of man will take place--a useful, industrious, variously
serviceable, and clever gregarious man--are in the highest degree
suitable to give rise to exceptional men of the most dangerous and
attractive qualities. For, while the capacity for adaptation, which is
every day trying changing conditions, and begins a new work with every
generation, almost with every decade, makes the POWERFULNESS of the type
impossible; while the collective impression of such future Europeans
will probably be that of numerous, talkative, weak-willed, and very
handy workmen who REQUIRE a master, a commander, as they require their
daily bread; while, therefore, the democratising of Europe will tend to
the production of a type prepared for SLAVERY in the most subtle
sense of the term: the STRONG man will necessarily in individual and
exceptional cases, become stronger and richer than he has perhaps ever
been before--owing to the unprejudicedness of his schooling, owing to
the immense variety of practice, art, and disguise. I meant to say
that the democratising of Europe is at the same time an involuntary
arrangement for the rearing of TYRANTS--taking the word in all its
meanings, even in its most spiritual sense.

243. I hear with pleasure that our sun is moving rapidly towards the
constellation Hercules: and I hope that the men on this earth will do
like the sun. And we foremost, we good Europeans!

244. There was a time when it was customary to call Germans "deep"
by way of distinction; but now that the most successful type of new
Germanism is covetous of quite other honours, and perhaps misses
"smartness" in all that has depth, it is almost opportune and patriotic
to doubt whether we did not formerly deceive ourselves with that
commendation: in short, whether German depth is not at bottom something
different and worse--and something from which, thank God, we are on the
point of successfully ridding ourselves. Let us try, then, to relearn
with regard to German depth; the only thing necessary for the purpose is
a little vivisection of the German soul.--The German soul is above all
manifold, varied in its source, aggregated and super-imposed, rather
than actually built: this is owing to its origin. A German who would
embolden himself to assert: "Two souls, alas, dwell in my breast," would
make a bad guess at the truth, or, more correctly, he would come far
short of the truth about the number of souls. As a people made up of
the most extraordinary mixing and mingling of races, perhaps even with a
preponderance of the pre-Aryan element as the "people of the centre" in
every sense of the term, the Germans are more intangible, more ample,
more contradictory, more unknown, more incalculable, more surprising,
and even more terrifying than other peoples are to themselves:--they
escape DEFINITION, and are thereby alone the despair of the French. It
IS characteristic of the Germans that the question: "What is German?"
never dies out among them. Kotzebue certainly knew his Germans well
enough: "We are known," they cried jubilantly to him--but Sand also
thought he knew them. Jean Paul knew what he was doing when he declared
himself incensed at Fichte's lying but patriotic flatteries and
exaggerations,--but it is probable that Goethe thought differently about
Germans from Jean Paul, even though he acknowledged him to be right with
regard to Fichte. It is a question what Goethe really thought about the
Germans?--But about many things around him he never spoke explicitly,
and all his life he knew how to keep an astute silence--probably he
had good reason for it. It is certain that it was not the "Wars of
Independence" that made him look up more joyfully, any more than it was
the French Revolution,--the event on account of which he RECONSTRUCTED
his "Faust," and indeed the whole problem of "man," was the appearance
of Napoleon. There are words of Goethe in which he condemns with
impatient severity, as from a foreign land, that which Germans take a
pride in, he once defined the famous German turn of mind as "Indulgence
towards its own and others' weaknesses." Was he wrong? it is
characteristic of Germans that one is seldom entirely wrong about them.
The German soul has passages and galleries in it, there are caves,
hiding-places, and dungeons therein, its disorder has much of the charm
of the mysterious, the German is well acquainted with the bypaths to
chaos. And as everything loves its symbol, so the German loves the
clouds and all that is obscure, evolving, crepuscular, damp, and
shrouded, it seems to him that everything uncertain, undeveloped,
self-displacing, and growing is "deep". The German himself does not
EXIST, he is BECOMING, he is "developing himself". "Development" is
therefore the essentially German discovery and hit in the great domain
of philosophical formulas,--a ruling idea, which, together with German
beer and German music, is labouring to Germanise all Europe. Foreigners
are astonished and attracted by the riddles which the conflicting nature
at the basis of the German soul propounds to them (riddles which
Hegel systematised and Richard Wagner has in the end set to music).
"Good-natured and spiteful"--such a juxtaposition, preposterous in the
case of every other people, is unfortunately only too often justified
in Germany one has only to live for a while among Swabians to know this!
The clumsiness of the German scholar and his social distastefulness
agree alarmingly well with his physical rope-dancing and nimble
boldness, of which all the Gods have learnt to be afraid. If any one
wishes to see the "German soul" demonstrated ad oculos, let him
only look at German taste, at German arts and manners what boorish
indifference to "taste"! How the noblest and the commonest stand there
in juxtaposition! How disorderly and how rich is the whole constitution
of this soul! The German DRAGS at his soul, he drags at everything he
experiences. He digests his events badly; he never gets "done"
with them; and German depth is often only a difficult, hesitating
"digestion." And just as all chronic invalids, all dyspeptics like what
is convenient, so the German loves "frankness" and "honesty"; it is
so CONVENIENT to be frank and honest!--This confidingness, this
complaisance, this showing-the-cards of German HONESTY, is probably the
most dangerous and most successful disguise which the German is up to
nowadays: it is his proper Mephistophelean art; with this he can "still
achieve much"! The German lets himself go, and thereby gazes with
faithful, blue, empty German eyes--and other countries immediately
confound him with his dressing-gown!--I meant to say that, let "German
depth" be what it will--among ourselves alone we perhaps take the
liberty to laugh at it--we shall do well to continue henceforth to
honour its appearance and good name, and not barter away too cheaply our
old reputation as a people of depth for Prussian "smartness," and
Berlin wit and sand. It is wise for a people to pose, and LET itself
be regarded, as profound, clumsy, good-natured, honest, and foolish: it
might even be--profound to do so! Finally, we should do honour to
our name--we are not called the "TIUSCHE VOLK" (deceptive people) for
nothing....

245. The "good old" time is past, it sang itself out in Mozart--how
happy are WE that his ROCOCO still speaks to us, that his "good
company," his tender enthusiasm, his childish delight in the Chinese and
its flourishes, his courtesy of heart, his longing for the elegant, the
amorous, the tripping, the tearful, and his belief in the South, can
still appeal to SOMETHING LEFT in us! Ah, some time or other it will be
over with it!--but who can doubt that it will be over still sooner with
the intelligence and taste for Beethoven! For he was only the last echo
of a break and transition in style, and NOT, like Mozart, the last echo
of a great European taste which had existed for centuries. Beethoven
is the intermediate event between an old mellow soul that is constantly
breaking down, and a future over-young soul that is always COMING;
there is spread over his music the twilight of eternal loss and eternal
extravagant hope,--the same light in which Europe was bathed when it
dreamed with Rousseau, when it danced round the Tree of Liberty of the
Revolution, and finally almost fell down in adoration before Napoleon.
But how rapidly does THIS very sentiment now pale, how difficult
nowadays is even the APPREHENSION of this sentiment, how strangely does
the language of Rousseau, Schiller, Shelley, and Byron sound to our ear,
in whom COLLECTIVELY the same fate of Europe was able to SPEAK, which
knew how to SING in Beethoven!--Whatever German music came afterwards,
belongs to Romanticism, that is to say, to a movement which,
historically considered, was still shorter, more fleeting, and more
superficial than that great interlude, the transition of Europe from
Rousseau to Napoleon, and to the rise of democracy. Weber--but what do
WE care nowadays for "Freischutz" and "Oberon"! Or Marschner's "Hans
Heiling" and "Vampyre"! Or even Wagner's "Tannhauser"! That is extinct,
although not yet forgotten music. This whole music of Romanticism,
besides, was not noble enough, was not musical enough, to maintain its
position anywhere but in the theatre and before the masses; from the
beginning it was second-rate music, which was little thought of by
genuine musicians. It was different with Felix Mendelssohn, that halcyon
master, who, on account of his lighter, purer, happier soul, quickly
acquired admiration, and was equally quickly forgotten: as the beautiful
EPISODE of German music. But with regard to Robert Schumann, who took
things seriously, and has been taken seriously from the first--he
was the last that founded a school,--do we not now regard it as a
satisfaction, a relief, a deliverance, that this very Romanticism
of Schumann's has been surmounted? Schumann, fleeing into the "Saxon
Switzerland" of his soul, with a half Werther-like, half Jean-Paul-like
nature (assuredly not like Beethoven! assuredly not like Byron!)--his
MANFRED music is a mistake and a misunderstanding to the extent of
injustice; Schumann, with his taste, which was fundamentally a PETTY
taste (that is to say, a dangerous propensity--doubly dangerous among
Germans--for quiet lyricism and intoxication of the feelings), going
constantly apart, timidly withdrawing and retiring, a noble weakling who
revelled in nothing but anonymous joy and sorrow, from the beginning
a sort of girl and NOLI ME TANGERE--this Schumann was already merely a
GERMAN event in music, and no longer a European event, as Beethoven had
been, as in a still greater degree Mozart had been; with Schumann German
music was threatened with its greatest danger, that of LOSING THE VOICE
FOR THE SOUL OF EUROPE and sinking into a merely national affair.

246. What a torture are books written in German to a reader who has a
THIRD ear! How indignantly he stands beside the slowly turning swamp
of sounds without tune and rhythms without dance, which Germans call
a "book"! And even the German who READS books! How lazily, how
reluctantly, how badly he reads! How many Germans know, and consider it
obligatory to know, that there is ART in every good sentence--art which
must be divined, if the sentence is to be understood! If there is a
misunderstanding about its TEMPO, for instance, the sentence itself
is misunderstood! That one must not be doubtful about the
rhythm-determining syllables, that one should feel the breaking of the
too-rigid symmetry as intentional and as a charm, that one should lend a
fine and patient ear to every STACCATO and every RUBATO, that one should
divine the sense in the sequence of the vowels and diphthongs, and how
delicately and richly they can be tinted and retinted in the order of
their arrangement--who among book-reading Germans is complaisant enough
to recognize such duties and requirements, and to listen to so much art
and intention in language? After all, one just "has no ear for it";
and so the most marked contrasts of style are not heard, and the most
delicate artistry is as it were SQUANDERED on the deaf.--These were my
thoughts when I noticed how clumsily and unintuitively two masters in
the art of prose-writing have been confounded: one, whose words drop
down hesitatingly and coldly, as from the roof of a damp cave--he counts
on their dull sound and echo; and another who manipulates his language
like a flexible sword, and from his arm down into his toes feels the
dangerous bliss of the quivering, over-sharp blade, which wishes to
bite, hiss, and cut.

247. How little the German style has to do with harmony and with the
ear, is shown by the fact that precisely our good musicians themselves
write badly. The German does not read aloud, he does not read for the
ear, but only with his eyes; he has put his ears away in the drawer for
the time. In antiquity when a man read--which was seldom enough--he read
something to himself, and in a loud voice; they were surprised when
any one read silently, and sought secretly the reason of it. In a
loud voice: that is to say, with all the swellings, inflections, and
variations of key and changes of TEMPO, in which the ancient PUBLIC
world took delight. The laws of the written style were then the same
as those of the spoken style; and these laws depended partly on the
surprising development and refined requirements of the ear and larynx;
partly on the strength, endurance, and power of the ancient lungs. In
the ancient sense, a period is above all a physiological whole, inasmuch
as it is comprised in one breath. Such periods as occur in Demosthenes
and Cicero, swelling twice and sinking twice, and all in one breath,
were pleasures to the men of ANTIQUITY, who knew by their own schooling
how to appreciate the virtue therein, the rareness and the difficulty
in the deliverance of such a period;--WE have really no right to the
BIG period, we modern men, who are short of breath in every sense! Those
ancients, indeed, were all of them dilettanti in speaking, consequently
connoisseurs, consequently critics--they thus brought their orators to
the highest pitch; in the same manner as in the last century, when all
Italian ladies and gentlemen knew how to sing, the virtuosoship of song
(and with it also the art of melody) reached its elevation. In Germany,
however (until quite recently when a kind of platform eloquence began
shyly and awkwardly enough to flutter its young wings), there was
properly speaking only one kind of public and APPROXIMATELY artistical
discourse--that delivered from the pulpit. The preacher was the only one
in Germany who knew the weight of a syllable or a word, in what manner a
sentence strikes, springs, rushes, flows, and comes to a close; he alone
had a conscience in his ears, often enough a bad conscience: for reasons
are not lacking why proficiency in oratory should be especially seldom
attained by a German, or almost always too late. The masterpiece of
German prose is therefore with good reason the masterpiece of its
greatest preacher: the BIBLE has hitherto been the best German
book. Compared with Luther's Bible, almost everything else is merely
"literature"--something which has not grown in Germany, and therefore
has not taken and does not take root in German hearts, as the Bible has
done.

248. There are two kinds of geniuses: one which above all engenders and
seeks to engender, and another which willingly lets itself be fructified
and brings forth. And similarly, among the gifted nations, there are
those on whom the woman's problem of pregnancy has devolved, and the
secret task of forming, maturing, and perfecting--the Greeks, for
instance, were a nation of this kind, and so are the French; and others
which have to fructify and become the cause of new modes of life--like
the Jews, the Romans, and, in all modesty be it asked: like the
Germans?--nations tortured and enraptured by unknown fevers and
irresistibly forced out of themselves, amorous and longing for
foreign races (for such as "let themselves be fructified"), and withal
imperious, like everything conscious of being full of generative force,
and consequently empowered "by the grace of God." These two kinds of
geniuses seek each other like man and woman; but they also misunderstand
each other--like man and woman.

249. Every nation has its own "Tartuffery," and calls that its
virtue.--One does not know--cannot know, the best that is in one.

250. What Europe owes to the Jews?--Many things, good and bad, and above
all one thing of the nature both of the best and the worst: the grand
style in morality, the fearfulness and majesty of infinite demands, of
infinite significations, the whole Romanticism and sublimity of moral
questionableness--and consequently just the most attractive, ensnaring,
and exquisite element in those iridescences and allurements to life,
in the aftersheen of which the sky of our European culture, its evening
sky, now glows--perhaps glows out. For this, we artists among the
spectators and philosophers, are--grateful to the Jews.

251. It must be taken into the bargain, if various clouds and
disturbances--in short, slight attacks of stupidity--pass over the
spirit of a people that suffers and WANTS to suffer from national
nervous fever and political ambition: for instance, among present-day
Germans there is alternately the anti-French folly, the anti-Semitic
folly, the anti-Polish folly, the Christian-romantic folly, the
Wagnerian folly, the Teutonic folly, the Prussian folly (just look at
those poor historians, the Sybels and Treitschkes, and their closely
bandaged heads), and whatever else these little obscurations of the
German spirit and conscience may be called. May it be forgiven me that
I, too, when on a short daring sojourn on very infected ground, did not
remain wholly exempt from the disease, but like every one else, began
to entertain thoughts about matters which did not concern me--the first
symptom of political infection. About the Jews, for instance, listen
to the following:--I have never yet met a German who was favourably
inclined to the Jews; and however decided the repudiation of actual
anti-Semitism may be on the part of all prudent and political men, this
prudence and policy is not perhaps directed against the nature of the
sentiment itself, but only against its dangerous excess, and especially
against the distasteful and infamous expression of this excess of
sentiment;--on this point we must not deceive ourselves. That Germany
has amply SUFFICIENT Jews, that the German stomach, the German blood,
has difficulty (and will long have difficulty) in disposing only of this
quantity of "Jew"--as the Italian, the Frenchman, and the Englishman
have done by means of a stronger digestion:--that is the unmistakable
declaration and language of a general instinct, to which one must listen
and according to which one must act. "Let no more Jews come in! And shut
the doors, especially towards the East (also towards Austria)!"--thus
commands the instinct of a people whose nature is still feeble and
uncertain, so that it could be easily wiped out, easily extinguished, by
a stronger race. The Jews, however, are beyond all doubt the strongest,
toughest, and purest race at present living in Europe, they know how
to succeed even under the worst conditions (in fact better than under
favourable ones), by means of virtues of some sort, which one would like
nowadays to label as vices--owing above all to a resolute faith which
does not need to be ashamed before "modern ideas", they alter only,
WHEN they do alter, in the same way that the Russian Empire makes
its conquest--as an empire that has plenty of time and is not of
yesterday--namely, according to the principle, "as slowly as possible"!
A thinker who has the future of Europe at heart, will, in all his
perspectives concerning the future, calculate upon the Jews, as he
will calculate upon the Russians, as above all the surest and likeliest
factors in the great play and battle of forces. That which is at present
called a "nation" in Europe, and is really rather a RES FACTA than NATA
(indeed, sometimes confusingly similar to a RES FICTA ET PICTA), is in
every case something evolving, young, easily displaced, and not yet
a race, much less such a race AERE PERENNUS, as the Jews are such
"nations" should most carefully avoid all hot-headed rivalry and
hostility! It is certain that the Jews, if they desired--or if they
were driven to it, as the anti-Semites seem to wish--COULD now have the
ascendancy, nay, literally the supremacy, over Europe, that they are NOT
working and planning for that end is equally certain. Meanwhile, they
rather wish and desire, even somewhat importunely, to be insorbed and
absorbed by Europe, they long to be finally settled, authorized, and
respected somewhere, and wish to put an end to the nomadic life, to the
"wandering Jew",--and one should certainly take account of this impulse
and tendency, and MAKE ADVANCES to it (it possibly betokens a mitigation
of the Jewish instincts) for which purpose it would perhaps be useful
and fair to banish the anti-Semitic bawlers out of the country. One
should make advances with all prudence, and with selection, pretty much
as the English nobility do It stands to reason that the more powerful
and strongly marked types of new Germanism could enter into relation
with the Jews with the least hesitation, for instance, the nobleman
officer from the Prussian border it would be interesting in many ways
to see whether the genius for money and patience (and especially some
intellect and intellectuality--sadly lacking in the place referred to)
could not in addition be annexed and trained to the hereditary art of
commanding and obeying--for both of which the country in question has
now a classic reputation But here it is expedient to break off my festal
discourse and my sprightly Teutonomania for I have already reached my
SERIOUS TOPIC, the "European problem," as I understand it, the rearing
of a new ruling caste for Europe.

252. They are not a philosophical race--the English: Bacon represents an
ATTACK on the philosophical spirit generally, Hobbes, Hume, and Locke,
an abasement, and a depreciation of the idea of a "philosopher" for more
than a century. It was AGAINST Hume that Kant uprose and raised himself;
it was Locke of whom Schelling RIGHTLY said, "JE MEPRISE LOCKE"; in the
struggle against the English mechanical stultification of the world,
Hegel and Schopenhauer (along with Goethe) were of one accord; the
two hostile brother-geniuses in philosophy, who pushed in different
directions towards the opposite poles of German thought, and thereby
wronged each other as only brothers will do.--What is lacking in
England, and has always been lacking, that half-actor and rhetorician
knew well enough, the absurd muddle-head, Carlyle, who sought to conceal
under passionate grimaces what he knew about himself: namely, what was
LACKING in Carlyle--real POWER of intellect, real DEPTH of intellectual
perception, in short, philosophy. It is characteristic of such an
unphilosophical race to hold on firmly to Christianity--they NEED its
discipline for "moralizing" and humanizing. The Englishman, more gloomy,
sensual, headstrong, and brutal than the German--is for that very
reason, as the baser of the two, also the most pious: he has all the
MORE NEED of Christianity. To finer nostrils, this English Christianity
itself has still a characteristic English taint of spleen and alcoholic
excess, for which, owing to good reasons, it is used as an antidote--the
finer poison to neutralize the coarser: a finer form of poisoning is
in fact a step in advance with coarse-mannered people, a step towards
spiritualization. The English coarseness and rustic demureness is still
most satisfactorily disguised by Christian pantomime, and by praying
and psalm-singing (or, more correctly, it is thereby explained and
differently expressed); and for the herd of drunkards and rakes who
formerly learned moral grunting under the influence of Methodism (and
more recently as the "Salvation Army"), a penitential fit may really be
the relatively highest manifestation of "humanity" to which they can
be elevated: so much may reasonably be admitted. That, however, which
offends even in the humanest Englishman is his lack of music, to speak
figuratively (and also literally): he has neither rhythm nor dance in
the movements of his soul and body; indeed, not even the desire for
rhythm and dance, for "music." Listen to him speaking; look at the most
beautiful Englishwoman WALKING--in no country on earth are there more
beautiful doves and swans; finally, listen to them singing! But I ask
too much...

253. There are truths which are best recognized by mediocre minds,
because they are best adapted for them, there are truths which only
possess charms and seductive power for mediocre spirits:--one is pushed
to this probably unpleasant conclusion, now that the influence of
respectable but mediocre Englishmen--I may mention Darwin, John
Stuart Mill, and Herbert Spencer--begins to gain the ascendancy in the
middle-class region of European taste. Indeed, who could doubt that it
is a useful thing for SUCH minds to have the ascendancy for a time? It
would be an error to consider the highly developed and independently
soaring minds as specially qualified for determining and collecting many
little common facts, and deducing conclusions from them; as exceptions,
they are rather from the first in no very favourable position towards
those who are "the rules." After all, they have more to do than merely
to perceive:--in effect, they have to BE something new, they have to
SIGNIFY something new, they have to REPRESENT new values! The gulf
between knowledge and capacity is perhaps greater, and also more
mysterious, than one thinks: the capable man in the grand style, the
creator, will possibly have to be an ignorant person;--while on the
other hand, for scientific discoveries like those of Darwin, a certain
narrowness, aridity, and industrious carefulness (in short, something
English) may not be unfavourable for arriving at them.--Finally, let
it not be forgotten that the English, with their profound mediocrity,
brought about once before a general depression of European intelligence.

What is called "modern ideas," or "the ideas of the eighteenth century,"
or "French ideas"--that, consequently, against which the GERMAN mind
rose up with profound disgust--is of English origin, there is no doubt
about it. The French were only the apes and actors of these ideas, their
best soldiers, and likewise, alas! their first and profoundest VICTIMS;
for owing to the diabolical Anglomania of "modern ideas," the AME
FRANCAIS has in the end become so thin and emaciated, that at present
one recalls its sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, its profound,
passionate strength, its inventive excellency, almost with disbelief.
One must, however, maintain this verdict of historical justice in
a determined manner, and defend it against present prejudices and
appearances: the European NOBLESSE--of sentiment, taste, and manners,
taking the word in every high sense--is the work and invention of
FRANCE; the European ignobleness, the plebeianism of modern ideas--is
ENGLAND'S work and invention.

254. Even at present France is still the seat of the most intellectual
and refined culture of Europe, it is still the high school of taste; but
one must know how to find this "France of taste." He who belongs to it
keeps himself well concealed:--they may be a small number in whom it
lives and is embodied, besides perhaps being men who do not stand upon
the strongest legs, in part fatalists, hypochondriacs, invalids, in
part persons over-indulged, over-refined, such as have the AMBITION to
conceal themselves.

They have all something in common: they keep their ears closed in
presence of the delirious folly and noisy spouting of the democratic
BOURGEOIS. In fact, a besotted and brutalized France at present sprawls
in the foreground--it recently celebrated a veritable orgy of bad taste,
and at the same time of self-admiration, at the funeral of Victor Hugo.
There is also something else common to them: a predilection to resist
intellectual Germanizing--and a still greater inability to do so!
In this France of intellect, which is also a France of pessimism,
Schopenhauer has perhaps become more at home, and more indigenous than
he has ever been in Germany; not to speak of Heinrich Heine, who has
long ago been re-incarnated in the more refined and fastidious lyrists
of Paris; or of Hegel, who at present, in the form of Taine--the FIRST
of living historians--exercises an almost tyrannical influence. As
regards Richard Wagner, however, the more French music learns to
adapt itself to the actual needs of the AME MODERNE, the more will it
"Wagnerite"; one can safely predict that beforehand,--it is already
taking place sufficiently! There are, however, three things which the
French can still boast of with pride as their heritage and possession,
and as indelible tokens of their ancient intellectual superiority
in Europe, in spite of all voluntary or involuntary Germanizing and
vulgarizing of taste. FIRSTLY, the capacity for artistic emotion, for
devotion to "form," for which the expression, L'ART POUR L'ART, along
with numerous others, has been invented:--such capacity has not been
lacking in France for three centuries; and owing to its reverence for
the "small number," it has again and again made a sort of chamber
music of literature possible, which is sought for in vain elsewhere
in Europe.--The SECOND thing whereby the French can lay claim to
a superiority over Europe is their ancient, many-sided, MORALISTIC
culture, owing to which one finds on an average, even in the petty
ROMANCIERS of the newspapers and chance BOULEVARDIERS DE PARIS, a
psychological sensitiveness and curiosity, of which, for example, one
has no conception (to say nothing of the thing itself!) in Germany.
The Germans lack a couple of centuries of the moralistic work requisite
thereto, which, as we have said, France has not grudged: those who call
the Germans "naive" on that account give them commendation for a defect.
(As the opposite of the German inexperience and innocence IN VOLUPTATE
PSYCHOLOGICA, which is not too remotely associated with the tediousness
of German intercourse,--and as the most successful expression of
genuine French curiosity and inventive talent in this domain of delicate
thrills, Henri Beyle may be noted; that remarkable anticipatory and
forerunning man, who, with a Napoleonic TEMPO, traversed HIS Europe,
in fact, several centuries of the European soul, as a surveyor and
discoverer thereof:--it has required two generations to OVERTAKE him
one way or other, to divine long afterwards some of the riddles
that perplexed and enraptured him--this strange Epicurean and man of
interrogation, the last great psychologist of France).--There is yet
a THIRD claim to superiority: in the French character there is a
successful half-way synthesis of the North and South, which makes them
comprehend many things, and enjoins upon them other things, which an
Englishman can never comprehend. Their temperament, turned alternately
to and from the South, in which from time to time the Provencal and
Ligurian blood froths over, preserves them from the dreadful, northern
grey-in-grey, from sunless conceptual-spectrism and from poverty of
blood--our GERMAN infirmity of taste, for the excessive prevalence
of which at the present moment, blood and iron, that is to say "high
politics," has with great resolution been prescribed (according to
a dangerous healing art, which bids me wait and wait, but not yet
hope).--There is also still in France a pre-understanding and
ready welcome for those rarer and rarely gratified men, who are too
comprehensive to find satisfaction in any kind of fatherlandism, and
know how to love the South when in the North and the North when in the
South--the born Midlanders, the "good Europeans." For them BIZET
has made music, this latest genius, who has seen a new beauty and
seduction,--who has discovered a piece of the SOUTH IN MUSIC.

255. I hold that many precautions should be taken against German music.
Suppose a person loves the South as I love it--as a great school
of recovery for the most spiritual and the most sensuous ills, as a
boundless solar profusion and effulgence which o'erspreads a sovereign
existence believing in itself--well, such a person will learn to be
somewhat on his guard against German music, because, in injuring his
taste anew, it will also injure his health anew. Such a Southerner, a
Southerner not by origin but by BELIEF, if he should dream of the future
of music, must also dream of it being freed from the influence of the
North; and must have in his ears the prelude to a deeper, mightier, and
perhaps more perverse and mysterious music, a super-German music, which
does not fade, pale, and die away, as all German music does, at the
sight of the blue, wanton sea and the Mediterranean clearness of sky--a
super-European music, which holds its own even in presence of the brown
sunsets of the desert, whose soul is akin to the palm-tree, and can be
at home and can roam with big, beautiful, lonely beasts of prey... I
could imagine a music of which the rarest charm would be that it knew
nothing more of good and evil; only that here and there perhaps some
sailor's home-sickness, some golden shadows and tender weaknesses might
sweep lightly over it; an art which, from the far distance, would see
the colours of a sinking and almost incomprehensible MORAL world fleeing
towards it, and would be hospitable enough and profound enough to
receive such belated fugitives.

256. Owing to the morbid estrangement which the nationality-craze has
induced and still induces among the nations of Europe, owing also to the
short-sighted and hasty-handed politicians, who with the help of this
craze, are at present in power, and do not suspect to what extent the
disintegrating policy they pursue must necessarily be only an interlude
policy--owing to all this and much else that is altogether unmentionable
at present, the most unmistakable signs that EUROPE WISHES TO BE ONE,
are now overlooked, or arbitrarily and falsely misinterpreted. With all
the more profound and large-minded men of this century, the real general
tendency of the mysterious labour of their souls was to prepare the way
for that new SYNTHESIS, and tentatively to anticipate the European of
the future; only in their simulations, or in their weaker moments, in
old age perhaps, did they belong to the "fatherlands"--they only rested
from themselves when they became "patriots." I think of such men as
Napoleon, Goethe, Beethoven, Stendhal, Heinrich Heine, Schopenhauer: it
must not be taken amiss if I also count Richard Wagner among them, about
whom one must not let oneself be deceived by his own misunderstandings
(geniuses like him have seldom the right to understand themselves),
still less, of course, by the unseemly noise with which he is now
resisted and opposed in France: the fact remains, nevertheless, that
Richard Wagner and the LATER FRENCH ROMANTICISM of the forties, are
most closely and intimately related to one another. They are akin,
fundamentally akin, in all the heights and depths of their requirements;
it is Europe, the ONE Europe, whose soul presses urgently and longingly,
outwards and upwards, in their multifarious and boisterous art--whither?
into a new light? towards a new sun? But who would attempt to express
accurately what all these masters of new modes of speech could not
express distinctly? It is certain that the same storm and stress
tormented them, that they SOUGHT in the same manner, these last great
seekers! All of them steeped in literature to their eyes and ears--the
first artists of universal literary culture--for the most part even
themselves writers, poets, intermediaries and blenders of the arts and
the senses (Wagner, as musician is reckoned among painters, as poet
among musicians, as artist generally among actors); all of them fanatics
for EXPRESSION "at any cost"--I specially mention Delacroix, the nearest
related to Wagner; all of them great discoverers in the realm of the
sublime, also of the loathsome and dreadful, still greater discoverers
in effect, in display, in the art of the show-shop; all of them talented
far beyond their genius, out and out VIRTUOSI, with mysterious accesses
to all that seduces, allures, constrains, and upsets; born enemies of
logic and of the straight line, hankering after the strange, the
exotic, the monstrous, the crooked, and the self-contradictory; as men,
Tantaluses of the will, plebeian parvenus, who knew themselves to be
incapable of a noble TEMPO or of a LENTO in life and action--think
of Balzac, for instance,--unrestrained workers, almost destroying
themselves by work; antinomians and rebels in manners, ambitious and
insatiable, without equilibrium and enjoyment; all of them finally
shattering and sinking down at the Christian cross (and with right
and reason, for who of them would have been sufficiently profound and
sufficiently original for an ANTI-CHRISTIAN philosophy?);--on the
whole, a boldly daring, splendidly overbearing, high-flying, and
aloft-up-dragging class of higher men, who had first to teach their
century--and it is the century of the MASSES--the conception "higher
man."... Let the German friends of Richard Wagner advise together as to
whether there is anything purely German in the Wagnerian art, or whether
its distinction does not consist precisely in coming from SUPER-GERMAN
sources and impulses: in which connection it may not be underrated
how indispensable Paris was to the development of his type, which the
strength of his instincts made him long to visit at the most
decisive time--and how the whole style of his proceedings, of his
self-apostolate, could only perfect itself in sight of the French
socialistic original. On a more subtle comparison it will perhaps be
found, to the honour of Richard Wagner's German nature, that he has
acted in everything with more strength, daring, severity, and elevation
than a nineteenth-century Frenchman could have done--owing to the
circumstance that we Germans are as yet nearer to barbarism than the
French;--perhaps even the most remarkable creation of Richard Wagner is
not only at present, but for ever inaccessible, incomprehensible, and
inimitable to the whole latter-day Latin race: the figure of Siegfried,
that VERY FREE man, who is probably far too free, too hard, too
cheerful, too healthy, too ANTI-CATHOLIC for the taste of old and mellow
civilized nations. He may even have been a sin against Romanticism, this
anti-Latin Siegfried: well, Wagner atoned amply for this sin in his old
sad days, when--anticipating a taste which has meanwhile passed into
politics--he began, with the religious vehemence peculiar to him, to
preach, at least, THE WAY TO ROME, if not to walk therein.--That
these last words may not be misunderstood, I will call to my aid a few
powerful rhymes, which will even betray to less delicate ears what I
mean--what I mean COUNTER TO the "last Wagner" and his Parsifal music:--

--Is this our mode?--From German heart came this vexed ululating? From
German body, this self-lacerating? Is ours this priestly hand-dilation,
This incense-fuming exaltation? Is ours this faltering, falling,
shambling, This quite uncertain ding-dong-dangling? This sly
nun-ogling, Ave-hour-bell ringing, This wholly false enraptured
heaven-o'erspringing?--Is this our mode?--Think well!--ye still wait for
admission--For what ye hear is ROME--ROME'S FAITH BY INTUITION!



CHAPTER IX. WHAT IS NOBLE?


257. EVERY elevation of the type "man," has hitherto been the work of an
aristocratic society and so it will always be--a society believing in
a long scale of gradations of rank and differences of worth among human
beings, and requiring slavery in some form or other. Without the PATHOS
OF DISTANCE, such as grows out of the incarnated difference of classes,
out of the constant out-looking and down-looking of the ruling caste on
subordinates and instruments, and out of their equally constant
practice of obeying and commanding, of keeping down and keeping at a
distance--that other more mysterious pathos could never have arisen, the
longing for an ever new widening of distance within the soul itself,
the formation of ever higher, rarer, further, more extended, more
comprehensive states, in short, just the elevation of the type "man,"
the continued "self-surmounting of man," to use a moral formula in
a supermoral sense. To be sure, one must not resign oneself to
any humanitarian illusions about the history of the origin of an
aristocratic society (that is to say, of the preliminary condition for
the elevation of the type "man"): the truth is hard. Let us acknowledge
unprejudicedly how every higher civilization hitherto has ORIGINATED!
Men with a still natural nature, barbarians in every terrible sense of
the word, men of prey, still in possession of unbroken strength of will
and desire for power, threw themselves upon weaker, more moral, more
peaceful races (perhaps trading or cattle-rearing communities), or upon
old mellow civilizations in which the final vital force was flickering
out in brilliant fireworks of wit and depravity. At the commencement,
the noble caste was always the barbarian caste: their superiority did
not consist first of all in their physical, but in their psychical
power--they were more COMPLETE men (which at every point also implies
the same as "more complete beasts").

258. Corruption--as the indication that anarchy threatens to break out
among the instincts, and that the foundation of the emotions, called
"life," is convulsed--is something radically different according to
the organization in which it manifests itself. When, for instance, an
aristocracy like that of France at the beginning of the Revolution,
flung away its privileges with sublime disgust and sacrificed itself
to an excess of its moral sentiments, it was corruption:--it was really
only the closing act of the corruption which had existed for centuries,
by virtue of which that aristocracy had abdicated step by step its
lordly prerogatives and lowered itself to a FUNCTION of royalty (in
the end even to its decoration and parade-dress). The essential thing,
however, in a good and healthy aristocracy is that it should not regard
itself as a function either of the kingship or the commonwealth, but
as the SIGNIFICANCE and highest justification thereof--that it should
therefore accept with a good conscience the sacrifice of a legion
of individuals, who, FOR ITS SAKE, must be suppressed and reduced to
imperfect men, to slaves and instruments. Its fundamental belief must
be precisely that society is NOT allowed to exist for its own sake, but
only as a foundation and scaffolding, by means of which a select class
of beings may be able to elevate themselves to their higher duties, and
in general to a higher EXISTENCE: like those sun-seeking climbing plants
in Java--they are called Sipo Matador,--which encircle an oak so
long and so often with their arms, until at last, high above it, but
supported by it, they can unfold their tops in the open light, and
exhibit their happiness.

259. To refrain mutually from injury, from violence, from exploitation,
and put one's will on a par with that of others: this may result in a
certain rough sense in good conduct among individuals when the necessary
conditions are given (namely, the actual similarity of the individuals
in amount of force and degree of worth, and their co-relation within one
organization). As soon, however, as one wished to take this principle
more generally, and if possible even as the FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE OF
SOCIETY, it would immediately disclose what it really is--namely, a Will
to the DENIAL of life, a principle of dissolution and decay. Here one
must think profoundly to the very basis and resist all sentimental
weakness: life itself is ESSENTIALLY appropriation, injury, conquest
of the strange and weak, suppression, severity, obtrusion of
peculiar forms, incorporation, and at the least, putting it mildest,
exploitation;--but why should one for ever use precisely these words
on which for ages a disparaging purpose has been stamped? Even the
organization within which, as was previously supposed, the
individuals treat each other as equal--it takes place in every
healthy aristocracy--must itself, if it be a living and not a dying
organization, do all that towards other bodies, which the individuals
within it refrain from doing to each other it will have to be the
incarnated Will to Power, it will endeavour to grow, to gain ground,
attract to itself and acquire ascendancy--not owing to any morality or
immorality, but because it LIVES, and because life IS precisely Will to
Power. On no point, however, is the ordinary consciousness of Europeans
more unwilling to be corrected than on this matter, people now rave
everywhere, even under the guise of science, about coming conditions of
society in which "the exploiting character" is to be absent--that sounds
to my ears as if they promised to invent a mode of life which should
refrain from all organic functions. "Exploitation" does not belong to a
depraved, or imperfect and primitive society it belongs to the nature of
the living being as a primary organic function, it is a consequence
of the intrinsic Will to Power, which is precisely the Will to
Life--Granting that as a theory this is a novelty--as a reality it is
the FUNDAMENTAL FACT of all history let us be so far honest towards
ourselves!

260. In a tour through the many finer and coarser moralities which have
hitherto prevailed or still prevail on the earth, I found certain traits
recurring regularly together, and connected with one another, until
finally two primary types revealed themselves to me, and a radical
distinction was brought to light. There is MASTER-MORALITY and
SLAVE-MORALITY,--I would at once add, however, that in all higher and
mixed civilizations, there are also attempts at the reconciliation of
the two moralities, but one finds still oftener the confusion and
mutual misunderstanding of them, indeed sometimes their close
juxtaposition--even in the same man, within one soul. The distinctions
of moral values have either originated in a ruling caste, pleasantly
conscious of being different from the ruled--or among the ruled class,
the slaves and dependents of all sorts. In the first case, when it is
the rulers who determine the conception "good," it is the exalted, proud
disposition which is regarded as the distinguishing feature, and that
which determines the order of rank. The noble type of man separates
from himself the beings in whom the opposite of this exalted, proud
disposition displays itself he despises them. Let it at once be noted
that in this first kind of morality the antithesis "good" and "bad"
means practically the same as "noble" and "despicable",--the antithesis
"good" and "EVIL" is of a different origin. The cowardly, the timid, the
insignificant, and those thinking merely of narrow utility are despised;
moreover, also, the distrustful, with their constrained glances, the
self-abasing, the dog-like kind of men who let themselves be abused,
the mendicant flatterers, and above all the liars:--it is a fundamental
belief of all aristocrats that the common people are untruthful. "We
truthful ones"--the nobility in ancient Greece called themselves. It is
obvious that everywhere the designations of moral value were at first
applied to MEN; and were only derivatively and at a later period applied
to ACTIONS; it is a gross mistake, therefore, when historians of morals
start with questions like, "Why have sympathetic actions been praised?"
The noble type of man regards HIMSELF as a determiner of values; he
does not require to be approved of; he passes the judgment: "What is
injurious to me is injurious in itself;" he knows that it is he himself
only who confers honour on things; he is a CREATOR OF VALUES. He
honours whatever he recognizes in himself: such morality equals
self-glorification. In the foreground there is the feeling of plenitude,
of power, which seeks to overflow, the happiness of high tension, the
consciousness of a wealth which would fain give and bestow:--the noble
man also helps the unfortunate, but not--or scarcely--out of pity, but
rather from an impulse generated by the super-abundance of power. The
noble man honours in himself the powerful one, him also who has power
over himself, who knows how to speak and how to keep silence, who
takes pleasure in subjecting himself to severity and hardness, and has
reverence for all that is severe and hard. "Wotan placed a hard heart in
my breast," says an old Scandinavian Saga: it is thus rightly expressed
from the soul of a proud Viking. Such a type of man is even proud of not
being made for sympathy; the hero of the Saga therefore adds warningly:
"He who has not a hard heart when young, will never have one." The noble
and brave who think thus are the furthest removed from the morality
which sees precisely in sympathy, or in acting for the good of others,
or in DESINTERESSEMENT, the characteristic of the moral; faith
in oneself, pride in oneself, a radical enmity and irony towards
"selflessness," belong as definitely to noble morality, as do a careless
scorn and precaution in presence of sympathy and the "warm heart."--It
is the powerful who KNOW how to honour, it is their art, their domain
for invention. The profound reverence for age and for tradition--all law
rests on this double reverence,--the belief and prejudice in favour of
ancestors and unfavourable to newcomers, is typical in the morality of
the powerful; and if, reversely, men of "modern ideas" believe almost
instinctively in "progress" and the "future," and are more and more
lacking in respect for old age, the ignoble origin of these "ideas" has
complacently betrayed itself thereby. A morality of the ruling class,
however, is more especially foreign and irritating to present-day taste
in the sternness of its principle that one has duties only to one's
equals; that one may act towards beings of a lower rank, towards all
that is foreign, just as seems good to one, or "as the heart desires,"
and in any case "beyond good and evil": it is here that sympathy and
similar sentiments can have a place. The ability and obligation to
exercise prolonged gratitude and prolonged revenge--both only within the
circle of equals,--artfulness in retaliation, RAFFINEMENT of the idea
in friendship, a certain necessity to have enemies (as outlets for the
emotions of envy, quarrelsomeness, arrogance--in fact, in order to be
a good FRIEND): all these are typical characteristics of the noble
morality, which, as has been pointed out, is not the morality of "modern
ideas," and is therefore at present difficult to realize, and also to
unearth and disclose.--It is otherwise with the second type of morality,
SLAVE-MORALITY. Supposing that the abused, the oppressed, the suffering,
the unemancipated, the weary, and those uncertain of themselves should
moralize, what will be the common element in their moral estimates?
Probably a pessimistic suspicion with regard to the entire situation of
man will find expression, perhaps a condemnation of man, together with
his situation. The slave has an unfavourable eye for the virtues of the
powerful; he has a skepticism and distrust, a REFINEMENT of distrust of
everything "good" that is there honoured--he would fain persuade himself
that the very happiness there is not genuine. On the other hand, THOSE
qualities which serve to alleviate the existence of sufferers are
brought into prominence and flooded with light; it is here that
sympathy, the kind, helping hand, the warm heart, patience, diligence,
humility, and friendliness attain to honour; for here these are the most
useful qualities, and almost the only means of supporting the burden of
existence. Slave-morality is essentially the morality of utility.
Here is the seat of the origin of the famous antithesis "good" and
"evil":--power and dangerousness are assumed to reside in the evil,
a certain dreadfulness, subtlety, and strength, which do not admit of
being despised. According to slave-morality, therefore, the "evil" man
arouses fear; according to master-morality, it is precisely the "good"
man who arouses fear and seeks to arouse it, while the bad man is
regarded as the despicable being. The contrast attains its maximum when,
in accordance with the logical consequences of slave-morality, a shade
of depreciation--it may be slight and well-intentioned--at last attaches
itself to the "good" man of this morality; because, according to the
servile mode of thought, the good man must in any case be the SAFE
man: he is good-natured, easily deceived, perhaps a little stupid, un
bonhomme. Everywhere that slave-morality gains the ascendancy, language
shows a tendency to approximate the significations of the words "good"
and "stupid."--A last fundamental difference: the desire for FREEDOM,
the instinct for happiness and the refinements of the feeling of liberty
belong as necessarily to slave-morals and morality, as artifice and
enthusiasm in reverence and devotion are the regular symptoms of an
aristocratic mode of thinking and estimating.--Hence we can understand
without further detail why love AS A PASSION--it is our European
specialty--must absolutely be of noble origin; as is well known, its
invention is due to the Provencal poet-cavaliers, those brilliant,
ingenious men of the "gai saber," to whom Europe owes so much, and
almost owes itself.

261. Vanity is one of the things which are perhaps most difficult for
a noble man to understand: he will be tempted to deny it, where another
kind of man thinks he sees it self-evidently. The problem for him is
to represent to his mind beings who seek to arouse a good opinion of
themselves which they themselves do not possess--and consequently also
do not "deserve,"--and who yet BELIEVE in this good opinion
afterwards. This seems to him on the one hand such bad taste and so
self-disrespectful, and on the other hand so grotesquely unreasonable,
that he would like to consider vanity an exception, and is doubtful
about it in most cases when it is spoken of. He will say, for
instance: "I may be mistaken about my value, and on the other hand
may nevertheless demand that my value should be acknowledged by others
precisely as I rate it:--that, however, is not vanity (but self-conceit,
or, in most cases, that which is called 'humility,' and also
'modesty')." Or he will even say: "For many reasons I can delight in
the good opinion of others, perhaps because I love and honour them,
and rejoice in all their joys, perhaps also because their good opinion
endorses and strengthens my belief in my own good opinion, perhaps
because the good opinion of others, even in cases where I do not share
it, is useful to me, or gives promise of usefulness:--all this, however,
is not vanity." The man of noble character must first bring it home
forcibly to his mind, especially with the aid of history, that, from
time immemorial, in all social strata in any way dependent, the ordinary
man WAS only that which he PASSED FOR:--not being at all accustomed to
fix values, he did not assign even to himself any other value than that
which his master assigned to him (it is the peculiar RIGHT OF MASTERS to
create values). It may be looked upon as the result of an extraordinary
atavism, that the ordinary man, even at present, is still always WAITING
for an opinion about himself, and then instinctively submitting himself
to it; yet by no means only to a "good" opinion, but also to a bad
and unjust one (think, for instance, of the greater part of the
self-appreciations and self-depreciations which believing women learn
from their confessors, and which in general the believing Christian
learns from his Church). In fact, conformably to the slow rise of the
democratic social order (and its cause, the blending of the blood
of masters and slaves), the originally noble and rare impulse of
the masters to assign a value to themselves and to "think well" of
themselves, will now be more and more encouraged and extended; but
it has at all times an older, ampler, and more radically ingrained
propensity opposed to it--and in the phenomenon of "vanity" this older
propensity overmasters the younger. The vain person rejoices over EVERY
good opinion which he hears about himself (quite apart from the point
of view of its usefulness, and equally regardless of its truth or
falsehood), just as he suffers from every bad opinion: for he subjects
himself to both, he feels himself subjected to both, by that oldest
instinct of subjection which breaks forth in him.--It is "the slave"
in the vain man's blood, the remains of the slave's craftiness--and how
much of the "slave" is still left in woman, for instance!--which
seeks to SEDUCE to good opinions of itself; it is the slave, too, who
immediately afterwards falls prostrate himself before these opinions, as
though he had not called them forth.--And to repeat it again: vanity is
an atavism.

262. A SPECIES originates, and a type becomes established and strong in
the long struggle with essentially constant UNFAVOURABLE conditions. On
the other hand, it is known by the experience of breeders that species
which receive super-abundant nourishment, and in general a surplus of
protection and care, immediately tend in the most marked way to develop
variations, and are fertile in prodigies and monstrosities (also in
monstrous vices). Now look at an aristocratic commonwealth, say
an ancient Greek polis, or Venice, as a voluntary or involuntary
contrivance for the purpose of REARING human beings; there are there men
beside one another, thrown upon their own resources, who want to make
their species prevail, chiefly because they MUST prevail, or else
run the terrible danger of being exterminated. The favour, the
super-abundance, the protection are there lacking under which variations
are fostered; the species needs itself as species, as something which,
precisely by virtue of its hardness, its uniformity, and simplicity of
structure, can in general prevail and make itself permanent in
constant struggle with its neighbours, or with rebellious or
rebellion-threatening vassals. The most varied experience teaches it
what are the qualities to which it principally owes the fact that
it still exists, in spite of all Gods and men, and has hitherto been
victorious: these qualities it calls virtues, and these virtues alone
it develops to maturity. It does so with severity, indeed it desires
severity; every aristocratic morality is intolerant in the education
of youth, in the control of women, in the marriage customs, in the
relations of old and young, in the penal laws (which have an eye only
for the degenerating): it counts intolerance itself among the virtues,
under the name of "justice." A type with few, but very marked features,
a species of severe, warlike, wisely silent, reserved, and reticent
men (and as such, with the most delicate sensibility for the charm and
nuances of society) is thus established, unaffected by the vicissitudes
of generations; the constant struggle with uniform UNFAVOURABLE
conditions is, as already remarked, the cause of a type becoming
stable and hard. Finally, however, a happy state of things results, the
enormous tension is relaxed; there are perhaps no more enemies among the
neighbouring peoples, and the means of life, even of the enjoyment
of life, are present in superabundance. With one stroke the bond and
constraint of the old discipline severs: it is no longer regarded as
necessary, as a condition of existence--if it would continue, it can
only do so as a form of LUXURY, as an archaizing TASTE. Variations,
whether they be deviations (into the higher, finer, and rarer), or
deteriorations and monstrosities, appear suddenly on the scene in the
greatest exuberance and splendour; the individual dares to be individual
and detach himself. At this turning-point of history there manifest
themselves, side by side, and often mixed and entangled together, a
magnificent, manifold, virgin-forest-like up-growth and up-striving, a
kind of TROPICAL TEMPO in the rivalry of growth, and an extraordinary
decay and self-destruction, owing to the savagely opposing and seemingly
exploding egoisms, which strive with one another "for sun and light,"
and can no longer assign any limit, restraint, or forbearance for
themselves by means of the hitherto existing morality. It was this
morality itself which piled up the strength so enormously, which bent
the bow in so threatening a manner:--it is now "out of date," it is
getting "out of date." The dangerous and disquieting point has been
reached when the greater, more manifold, more comprehensive life IS
LIVED BEYOND the old morality; the "individual" stands out, and is
obliged to have recourse to his own law-giving, his own arts and
artifices for self-preservation, self-elevation, and self-deliverance.
Nothing but new "Whys," nothing but new "Hows," no common formulas any
longer, misunderstanding and disregard in league with each other, decay,
deterioration, and the loftiest desires frightfully entangled, the
genius of the race overflowing from all the cornucopias of good and bad,
a portentous simultaneousness of Spring and Autumn, full of new charms
and mysteries peculiar to the fresh, still inexhausted, still unwearied
corruption. Danger is again present, the mother of morality, great
danger; this time shifted into the individual, into the neighbour and
friend, into the street, into their own child, into their own heart,
into all the most personal and secret recesses of their desires and
volitions. What will the moral philosophers who appear at this time have
to preach? They discover, these sharp onlookers and loafers, that the
end is quickly approaching, that everything around them decays and
produces decay, that nothing will endure until the day after tomorrow,
except one species of man, the incurably MEDIOCRE. The mediocre alone
have a prospect of continuing and propagating themselves--they will
be the men of the future, the sole survivors; "be like them! become
mediocre!" is now the only morality which has still a significance,
which still obtains a hearing.--But it is difficult to preach this
morality of mediocrity! it can never avow what it is and what it
desires! it has to talk of moderation and dignity and duty and brotherly
love--it will have difficulty IN CONCEALING ITS IRONY!

263. There is an INSTINCT FOR RANK, which more than anything else is
already the sign of a HIGH rank; there is a DELIGHT in the NUANCES
of reverence which leads one to infer noble origin and habits. The
refinement, goodness, and loftiness of a soul are put to a perilous test
when something passes by that is of the highest rank, but is not
yet protected by the awe of authority from obtrusive touches and
incivilities: something that goes its way like a living touchstone,
undistinguished, undiscovered, and tentative, perhaps voluntarily veiled
and disguised. He whose task and practice it is to investigate souls,
will avail himself of many varieties of this very art to determine the
ultimate value of a soul, the unalterable, innate order of rank to which
it belongs: he will test it by its INSTINCT FOR REVERENCE. DIFFERENCE
ENGENDRE HAINE: the vulgarity of many a nature spurts up suddenly like
dirty water, when any holy vessel, any jewel from closed shrines, any
book bearing the marks of great destiny, is brought before it; while
on the other hand, there is an involuntary silence, a hesitation of the
eye, a cessation of all gestures, by which it is indicated that a soul
FEELS the nearness of what is worthiest of respect. The way in which, on
the whole, the reverence for the BIBLE has hitherto been maintained
in Europe, is perhaps the best example of discipline and refinement of
manners which Europe owes to Christianity: books of such profoundness
and supreme significance require for their protection an external
tyranny of authority, in order to acquire the PERIOD of thousands of
years which is necessary to exhaust and unriddle them. Much has been
achieved when the sentiment has been at last instilled into the masses
(the shallow-pates and the boobies of every kind) that they are not
allowed to touch everything, that there are holy experiences before
which they must take off their shoes and keep away the unclean hand--it
is almost their highest advance towards humanity. On the contrary, in
the so-called cultured classes, the believers in "modern ideas," nothing
is perhaps so repulsive as their lack of shame, the easy insolence of
eye and hand with which they touch, taste, and finger everything; and it
is possible that even yet there is more RELATIVE nobility of taste, and
more tact for reverence among the people, among the lower classes of
the people, especially among peasants, than among the newspaper-reading
DEMIMONDE of intellect, the cultured class.

264. It cannot be effaced from a man's soul what his ancestors have
preferably and most constantly done: whether they were perhaps diligent
economizers attached to a desk and a cash-box, modest and citizen-like
in their desires, modest also in their virtues; or whether they were
accustomed to commanding from morning till night, fond of rude pleasures
and probably of still ruder duties and responsibilities; or whether,
finally, at one time or another, they have sacrificed old privileges of
birth and possession, in order to live wholly for their faith--for their
"God,"--as men of an inexorable and sensitive conscience, which blushes
at every compromise. It is quite impossible for a man NOT to have
the qualities and predilections of his parents and ancestors in his
constitution, whatever appearances may suggest to the contrary. This is
the problem of race. Granted that one knows something of the parents,
it is admissible to draw a conclusion about the child: any kind
of offensive incontinence, any kind of sordid envy, or of clumsy
self-vaunting--the three things which together have constituted the
genuine plebeian type in all times--such must pass over to the child, as
surely as bad blood; and with the help of the best education and culture
one will only succeed in DECEIVING with regard to such heredity.--And
what else does education and culture try to do nowadays! In our very
democratic, or rather, very plebeian age, "education" and "culture" MUST
be essentially the art of deceiving--deceiving with regard to origin,
with regard to the inherited plebeianism in body and soul. An educator
who nowadays preached truthfulness above everything else, and called out
constantly to his pupils: "Be true! Be natural! Show yourselves as you
are!"--even such a virtuous and sincere ass would learn in a short time
to have recourse to the FURCA of Horace, NATURAM EXPELLERE: with what
results? "Plebeianism" USQUE RECURRET. [FOOTNOTE: Horace's "Epistles,"
I. x. 24.]

265. At the risk of displeasing innocent ears, I submit that egoism
belongs to the essence of a noble soul, I mean the unalterable belief
that to a being such as "we," other beings must naturally be in
subjection, and have to sacrifice themselves. The noble soul accepts the
fact of his egoism without question, and also without consciousness of
harshness, constraint, or arbitrariness therein, but rather as something
that may have its basis in the primary law of things:--if he sought a
designation for it he would say: "It is justice itself." He acknowledges
under certain circumstances, which made him hesitate at first, that
there are other equally privileged ones; as soon as he has settled this
question of rank, he moves among those equals and equally privileged
ones with the same assurance, as regards modesty and delicate respect,
which he enjoys in intercourse with himself--in accordance with an
innate heavenly mechanism which all the stars understand. It is an
ADDITIONAL instance of his egoism, this artfulness and self-limitation
in intercourse with his equals--every star is a similar egoist; he
honours HIMSELF in them, and in the rights which he concedes to them, he
has no doubt that the exchange of honours and rights, as the ESSENCE of
all intercourse, belongs also to the natural condition of things. The
noble soul gives as he takes, prompted by the passionate and sensitive
instinct of requital, which is at the root of his nature. The notion of
"favour" has, INTER PARES, neither significance nor good repute; there
may be a sublime way of letting gifts as it were light upon one from
above, and of drinking them thirstily like dew-drops; but for those
arts and displays the noble soul has no aptitude. His egoism hinders him
here: in general, he looks "aloft" unwillingly--he looks either FORWARD,
horizontally and deliberately, or downwards--HE KNOWS THAT HE IS ON A
HEIGHT.

266. "One can only truly esteem him who does not LOOK OUT FOR
himself."--Goethe to Rath Schlosser.

267. The Chinese have a proverb which mothers even teach their children:
"SIAO-SIN" ("MAKE THY HEART SMALL"). This is the essentially fundamental
tendency in latter-day civilizations. I have no doubt that an ancient
Greek, also, would first of all remark the self-dwarfing in us Europeans
of today--in this respect alone we should immediately be "distasteful"
to him.

268. What, after all, is ignobleness?--Words are vocal symbols for
ideas; ideas, however, are more or less definite mental symbols
for frequently returning and concurring sensations, for groups of
sensations. It is not sufficient to use the same words in order to
understand one another: we must also employ the same words for the same
kind of internal experiences, we must in the end have experiences IN
COMMON. On this account the people of one nation understand one another
better than those belonging to different nations, even when they use
the same language; or rather, when people have lived long together under
similar conditions (of climate, soil, danger, requirement, toil) there
ORIGINATES therefrom an entity that "understands itself"--namely, a
nation. In all souls a like number of frequently recurring experiences
have gained the upper hand over those occurring more rarely: about
these matters people understand one another rapidly and always more
rapidly--the history of language is the history of a process of
abbreviation; on the basis of this quick comprehension people always
unite closer and closer. The greater the danger, the greater is the
need of agreeing quickly and readily about what is necessary; not to
misunderstand one another in danger--that is what cannot at all be
dispensed with in intercourse. Also in all loves and friendships one has
the experience that nothing of the kind continues when the discovery
has been made that in using the same words, one of the two parties has
feelings, thoughts, intuitions, wishes, or fears different from those of
the other. (The fear of the "eternal misunderstanding": that is the good
genius which so often keeps persons of different sexes from too
hasty attachments, to which sense and heart prompt them--and NOT some
Schopenhauerian "genius of the species"!) Whichever groups of sensations
within a soul awaken most readily, begin to speak, and give the word of
command--these decide as to the general order of rank of its values, and
determine ultimately its list of desirable things. A man's estimates of
value betray something of the STRUCTURE of his soul, and wherein it
sees its conditions of life, its intrinsic needs. Supposing now that
necessity has from all time drawn together only such men as could
express similar requirements and similar experiences by similar symbols,
it results on the whole that the easy COMMUNICABILITY of need,
which implies ultimately the undergoing only of average and COMMON
experiences, must have been the most potent of all the forces which
have hitherto operated upon mankind. The more similar, the more ordinary
people, have always had and are still having the advantage; the more
select, more refined, more unique, and difficultly comprehensible, are
liable to stand alone; they succumb to accidents in their isolation, and
seldom propagate themselves. One must appeal to immense opposing forces,
in order to thwart this natural, all-too-natural PROGRESSUS IN SIMILE,
the evolution of man to the similar, the ordinary, the average, the
gregarious--to the IGNOBLE--!

269. The more a psychologist--a born, an unavoidable psychologist
and soul-diviner--turns his attention to the more select cases and
individuals, the greater is his danger of being suffocated by sympathy:
he NEEDS sternness and cheerfulness more than any other man. For
the corruption, the ruination of higher men, of the more unusually
constituted souls, is in fact, the rule: it is dreadful to have such a
rule always before one's eyes. The manifold torment of the psychologist
who has discovered this ruination, who discovers once, and then
discovers ALMOST repeatedly throughout all history, this universal
inner "desperateness" of higher men, this eternal "too late!" in every
sense--may perhaps one day be the cause of his turning with
bitterness against his own lot, and of his making an attempt at
self-destruction--of his "going to ruin" himself. One may perceive
in almost every psychologist a tell-tale inclination for delightful
intercourse with commonplace and well-ordered men; the fact is thereby
disclosed that he always requires healing, that he needs a sort
of flight and forgetfulness, away from what his insight and
incisiveness--from what his "business"--has laid upon his conscience.
The fear of his memory is peculiar to him. He is easily silenced by the
judgment of others; he hears with unmoved countenance how people honour,
admire, love, and glorify, where he has PERCEIVED--or he even conceals
his silence by expressly assenting to some plausible opinion. Perhaps
the paradox of his situation becomes so dreadful that, precisely
where he has learnt GREAT SYMPATHY, together with great CONTEMPT, the
multitude, the educated, and the visionaries, have on their part learnt
great reverence--reverence for "great men" and marvelous animals, for
the sake of whom one blesses and honours the fatherland, the earth, the
dignity of mankind, and one's own self, to whom one points the young,
and in view of whom one educates them. And who knows but in all great
instances hitherto just the same happened: that the multitude worshipped
a God, and that the "God" was only a poor sacrificial animal! SUCCESS
has always been the greatest liar--and the "work" itself is a success;
the great statesman, the conqueror, the discoverer, are disguised in
their creations until they are unrecognizable; the "work" of the artist,
of the philosopher, only invents him who has created it, is REPUTED
to have created it; the "great men," as they are reverenced, are poor
little fictions composed afterwards; in the world of historical values
spurious coinage PREVAILS. Those great poets, for example, such as
Byron, Musset, Poe, Leopardi, Kleist, Gogol (I do not venture to mention
much greater names, but I have them in my mind), as they now appear, and
were perhaps obliged to be: men of the moment, enthusiastic, sensuous,
and childish, light-minded and impulsive in their trust and distrust;
with souls in which usually some flaw has to be concealed; often taking
revenge with their works for an internal defilement, often seeking
forgetfulness in their soaring from a too true memory, often lost in
the mud and almost in love with it, until they become like the
Will-o'-the-Wisps around the swamps, and PRETEND TO BE stars--the people
then call them idealists,--often struggling with protracted disgust,
with an ever-reappearing phantom of disbelief, which makes them cold,
and obliges them to languish for GLORIA and devour "faith as it is"
out of the hands of intoxicated adulators:--what a TORMENT these great
artists are and the so-called higher men in general, to him who has once
found them out! It is thus conceivable that it is just from woman--who
is clairvoyant in the world of suffering, and also unfortunately eager
to help and save to an extent far beyond her powers--that THEY have
learnt so readily those outbreaks of boundless devoted SYMPATHY, which
the multitude, above all the reverent multitude, do not understand,
and overwhelm with prying and self-gratifying interpretations. This
sympathizing invariably deceives itself as to its power; woman would
like to believe that love can do EVERYTHING--it is the SUPERSTITION
peculiar to her. Alas, he who knows the heart finds out how poor,
helpless, pretentious, and blundering even the best and deepest love
is--he finds that it rather DESTROYS than saves!--It is possible that
under the holy fable and travesty of the life of Jesus there is hidden
one of the most painful cases of the martyrdom of KNOWLEDGE ABOUT LOVE:
the martyrdom of the most innocent and most craving heart, that
never had enough of any human love, that DEMANDED love, that demanded
inexorably and frantically to be loved and nothing else, with terrible
outbursts against those who refused him their love; the story of a poor
soul insatiated and insatiable in love, that had to invent hell to send
thither those who WOULD NOT love him--and that at last, enlightened
about human love, had to invent a God who is entire love, entire
CAPACITY for love--who takes pity on human love, because it is so
paltry, so ignorant! He who has such sentiments, he who has such
KNOWLEDGE about love--SEEKS for death!--But why should one deal with
such painful matters? Provided, of course, that one is not obliged to do
so.

270. The intellectual haughtiness and loathing of every man who has
suffered deeply--it almost determines the order of rank HOW deeply men
can suffer--the chilling certainty, with which he is thoroughly imbued
and coloured, that by virtue of his suffering he KNOWS MORE than the
shrewdest and wisest can ever know, that he has been familiar with,
and "at home" in, many distant, dreadful worlds of which "YOU know
nothing"!--this silent intellectual haughtiness of the sufferer, this
pride of the elect of knowledge, of the "initiated," of the almost
sacrificed, finds all forms of disguise necessary to protect itself from
contact with officious and sympathizing hands, and in general from all
that is not its equal in suffering. Profound suffering makes noble:
it separates.--One of the most refined forms of disguise is Epicurism,
along with a certain ostentatious boldness of taste, which takes
suffering lightly, and puts itself on the defensive against all that
is sorrowful and profound. They are "gay men" who make use of gaiety,
because they are misunderstood on account of it--they WISH to be
misunderstood. There are "scientific minds" who make use of science,
because it gives a gay appearance, and because scientificness leads to
the conclusion that a person is superficial--they WISH to mislead to a
false conclusion. There are free insolent minds which would fain conceal
and deny that they are broken, proud, incurable hearts (the cynicism of
Hamlet--the case of Galiani); and occasionally folly itself is the mask
of an unfortunate OVER-ASSURED knowledge.--From which it follows that it
is the part of a more refined humanity to have reverence "for the mask,"
and not to make use of psychology and curiosity in the wrong place.

271. That which separates two men most profoundly is a different sense
and grade of purity. What does it matter about all their honesty and
reciprocal usefulness, what does it matter about all their mutual
good-will: the fact still remains--they "cannot smell each other!" The
highest instinct for purity places him who is affected with it in the
most extraordinary and dangerous isolation, as a saint: for it is just
holiness--the highest spiritualization of the instinct in question. Any
kind of cognizance of an indescribable excess in the joy of the bath,
any kind of ardour or thirst which perpetually impels the soul out
of night into the morning, and out of gloom, out of "affliction" into
clearness, brightness, depth, and refinement:--just as much as such a
tendency DISTINGUISHES--it is a noble tendency--it also SEPARATES.--The
pity of the saint is pity for the FILTH of the human, all-too-human.
And there are grades and heights where pity itself is regarded by him as
impurity, as filth.

272. Signs of nobility: never to think of lowering our duties to the
rank of duties for everybody; to be unwilling to renounce or to share
our responsibilities; to count our prerogatives, and the exercise of
them, among our DUTIES.

273. A man who strives after great things, looks upon every one whom
he encounters on his way either as a means of advance, or a delay and
hindrance--or as a temporary resting-place. His peculiar lofty BOUNTY
to his fellow-men is only possible when he attains his elevation and
dominates. Impatience, and the consciousness of being always condemned
to comedy up to that time--for even strife is a comedy, and conceals the
end, as every means does--spoil all intercourse for him; this kind of
man is acquainted with solitude, and what is most poisonous in it.

274. THE PROBLEM OF THOSE WHO WAIT.--Happy chances are necessary, and
many incalculable elements, in order that a higher man in whom the
solution of a problem is dormant, may yet take action, or "break forth,"
as one might say--at the right moment. On an average it DOES NOT happen;
and in all corners of the earth there are waiting ones sitting who
hardly know to what extent they are waiting, and still less that they
wait in vain. Occasionally, too, the waking call comes too late--the
chance which gives "permission" to take action--when their best youth,
and strength for action have been used up in sitting still; and how many
a one, just as he "sprang up," has found with horror that his limbs are
benumbed and his spirits are now too heavy! "It is too late," he has
said to himself--and has become self-distrustful and henceforth for ever
useless.--In the domain of genius, may not the "Raphael without
hands" (taking the expression in its widest sense) perhaps not be the
exception, but the rule?--Perhaps genius is by no means so rare: but
rather the five hundred HANDS which it requires in order to tyrannize
over the [GREEK INSERTED HERE], "the right time"--in order to take
chance by the forelock!

275. He who does not WISH to see the height of a man, looks all the
more sharply at what is low in him, and in the foreground--and thereby
betrays himself.

276. In all kinds of injury and loss the lower and coarser soul is
better off than the nobler soul: the dangers of the latter must be
greater, the probability that it will come to grief and perish is in
fact immense, considering the multiplicity of the conditions of its
existence.--In a lizard a finger grows again which has been lost; not so
in man.--

277. It is too bad! Always the old story! When a man has finished
building his house, he finds that he has learnt unawares something
which he OUGHT absolutely to have known before he--began to build. The
eternal, fatal "Too late!" The melancholia of everything COMPLETED--!

278.--Wanderer, who art thou? I see thee follow thy path without scorn,
without love, with unfathomable eyes, wet and sad as a plummet which has
returned to the light insatiated out of every depth--what did it seek
down there?--with a bosom that never sighs, with lips that conceal their
loathing, with a hand which only slowly grasps: who art thou? what
hast thou done? Rest thee here: this place has hospitality for every
one--refresh thyself! And whoever thou art, what is it that now pleases
thee? What will serve to refresh thee? Only name it, whatever I have
I offer thee! "To refresh me? To refresh me? Oh, thou prying one,
what sayest thou! But give me, I pray thee---" What? what? Speak out!
"Another mask! A second mask!"

279. Men of profound sadness betray themselves when they are happy: they
have a mode of seizing upon happiness as though they would choke and
strangle it, out of jealousy--ah, they know only too well that it will
flee from them!

280. "Bad! Bad! What? Does he not--go back?" Yes! But you misunderstand
him when you complain about it. He goes back like every one who is about
to make a great spring.

281.--"Will people believe it of me? But I insist that they believe it
of me: I have always thought very unsatisfactorily of myself and about
myself, only in very rare cases, only compulsorily, always without
delight in 'the subject,' ready to digress from 'myself,' and always
without faith in the result, owing to an unconquerable distrust of the
POSSIBILITY of self-knowledge, which has led me so far as to feel a
CONTRADICTIO IN ADJECTO even in the idea of 'direct knowledge' which
theorists allow themselves:--this matter of fact is almost the most
certain thing I know about myself. There must be a sort of repugnance
in me to BELIEVE anything definite about myself.--Is there perhaps
some enigma therein? Probably; but fortunately nothing for my own
teeth.--Perhaps it betrays the species to which I belong?--but not to
myself, as is sufficiently agreeable to me."

282.--"But what has happened to you?"--"I do not know," he said,
hesitatingly; "perhaps the Harpies have flown over my table."--It
sometimes happens nowadays that a gentle, sober, retiring man becomes
suddenly mad, breaks the plates, upsets the table, shrieks, raves,
and shocks everybody--and finally withdraws, ashamed, and raging at
himself--whither? for what purpose? To famish apart? To suffocate with
his memories?--To him who has the desires of a lofty and dainty soul,
and only seldom finds his table laid and his food prepared, the danger
will always be great--nowadays, however, it is extraordinarily so.
Thrown into the midst of a noisy and plebeian age, with which he does
not like to eat out of the same dish, he may readily perish of hunger
and thirst--or, should he nevertheless finally "fall to," of sudden
nausea.--We have probably all sat at tables to which we did not belong;
and precisely the most spiritual of us, who are most difficult to
nourish, know the dangerous DYSPEPSIA which originates from a sudden
insight and disillusionment about our food and our messmates--the
AFTER-DINNER NAUSEA.

283. If one wishes to praise at all, it is a delicate and at the
same time a noble self-control, to praise only where one DOES NOT
agree--otherwise in fact one would praise oneself, which is contrary
to good taste:--a self-control, to be sure, which offers excellent
opportunity and provocation to constant MISUNDERSTANDING. To be able to
allow oneself this veritable luxury of taste and morality, one must
not live among intellectual imbeciles, but rather among men whose
misunderstandings and mistakes amuse by their refinement--or one will
have to pay dearly for it!--"He praises me, THEREFORE he acknowledges me
to be right"--this asinine method of inference spoils half of the life
of us recluses, for it brings the asses into our neighbourhood and
friendship.

284. To live in a vast and proud tranquility; always beyond... To have,
or not to have, one's emotions, one's For and Against, according to
choice; to lower oneself to them for hours; to SEAT oneself on them as
upon horses, and often as upon asses:--for one must know how to make
use of their stupidity as well as of their fire. To conserve one's
three hundred foregrounds; also one's black spectacles: for there are
circumstances when nobody must look into our eyes, still less into our
"motives." And to choose for company that roguish and cheerful vice,
politeness. And to remain master of one's four virtues, courage,
insight, sympathy, and solitude. For solitude is a virtue with us, as
a sublime bent and bias to purity, which divines that in the contact of
man and man--"in society"--it must be unavoidably impure. All society
makes one somehow, somewhere, or sometime--"commonplace."

285. The greatest events and thoughts--the greatest thoughts, however,
are the greatest events--are longest in being comprehended: the
generations which are contemporary with them do not EXPERIENCE such
events--they live past them. Something happens there as in the realm of
stars. The light of the furthest stars is longest in reaching man; and
before it has arrived man DENIES--that there are stars there. "How
many centuries does a mind require to be understood?"--that is also a
standard, one also makes a gradation of rank and an etiquette therewith,
such as is necessary for mind and for star.

286. "Here is the prospect free, the mind exalted." [FOOTNOTE: Goethe's
"Faust," Part II, Act V. The words of Dr. Marianus.]--But there is a
reverse kind of man, who is also upon a height, and has also a free
prospect--but looks DOWNWARDS.

287. What is noble? What does the word "noble" still mean for us
nowadays? How does the noble man betray himself, how is he recognized
under this heavy overcast sky of the commencing plebeianism, by which
everything is rendered opaque and leaden?--It is not his actions which
establish his claim--actions are always ambiguous, always inscrutable;
neither is it his "works." One finds nowadays among artists and scholars
plenty of those who betray by their works that a profound longing for
nobleness impels them; but this very NEED of nobleness is radically
different from the needs of the noble soul itself, and is in fact the
eloquent and dangerous sign of the lack thereof. It is not the works,
but the BELIEF which is here decisive and determines the order of
rank--to employ once more an old religious formula with a new and deeper
meaning--it is some fundamental certainty which a noble soul has about
itself, something which is not to be sought, is not to be found, and
perhaps, also, is not to be lost.--THE NOBLE SOUL HAS REVERENCE FOR
ITSELF.--

288. There are men who are unavoidably intellectual, let them turn
and twist themselves as they will, and hold their hands before their
treacherous eyes--as though the hand were not a betrayer; it always
comes out at last that they have something which they hide--namely,
intellect. One of the subtlest means of deceiving, at least as long as
possible, and of successfully representing oneself to be stupider
than one really is--which in everyday life is often as desirable as
an umbrella,--is called ENTHUSIASM, including what belongs to it, for
instance, virtue. For as Galiani said, who was obliged to know it: VERTU
EST ENTHOUSIASME.

289. In the writings of a recluse one always hears something of the echo
of the wilderness, something of the murmuring tones and timid vigilance
of solitude; in his strongest words, even in his cry itself, there
sounds a new and more dangerous kind of silence, of concealment. He who
has sat day and night, from year's end to year's end, alone with his
soul in familiar discord and discourse, he who has become a cave-bear,
or a treasure-seeker, or a treasure-guardian and dragon in his cave--it
may be a labyrinth, but can also be a gold-mine--his ideas themselves
eventually acquire a twilight-colour of their own, and an odour, as much
of the depth as of the mould, something uncommunicative and repulsive,
which blows chilly upon every passer-by. The recluse does not believe
that a philosopher--supposing that a philosopher has always in the first
place been a recluse--ever expressed his actual and ultimate opinions in
books: are not books written precisely to hide what is in us?--indeed,
he will doubt whether a philosopher CAN have "ultimate and actual"
opinions at all; whether behind every cave in him there is not, and must
necessarily be, a still deeper cave: an ampler, stranger, richer
world beyond the surface, an abyss behind every bottom, beneath every
"foundation." Every philosophy is a foreground philosophy--this is a
recluse's verdict: "There is something arbitrary in the fact that the
PHILOSOPHER came to a stand here, took a retrospect, and looked around;
that he HERE laid his spade aside and did not dig any deeper--there
is also something suspicious in it." Every philosophy also CONCEALS a
philosophy; every opinion is also a LURKING-PLACE, every word is also a
MASK.

290. Every deep thinker is more afraid of being understood than of being
misunderstood. The latter perhaps wounds his vanity; but the former
wounds his heart, his sympathy, which always says: "Ah, why would you
also have as hard a time of it as I have?"

291. Man, a COMPLEX, mendacious, artful, and inscrutable animal, uncanny
to the other animals by his artifice and sagacity, rather than by his
strength, has invented the good conscience in order finally to enjoy his
soul as something SIMPLE; and the whole of morality is a long, audacious
falsification, by virtue of which generally enjoyment at the sight of
the soul becomes possible. From this point of view there is perhaps much
more in the conception of "art" than is generally believed.

292. A philosopher: that is a man who constantly experiences, sees,
hears, suspects, hopes, and dreams extraordinary things; who is struck
by his own thoughts as if they came from the outside, from above and
below, as a species of events and lightning-flashes PECULIAR TO HIM; who
is perhaps himself a storm pregnant with new lightnings; a portentous
man, around whom there is always rumbling and mumbling and gaping and
something uncanny going on. A philosopher: alas, a being who often
runs away from himself, is often afraid of himself--but whose curiosity
always makes him "come to himself" again.

293. A man who says: "I like that, I take it for my own, and mean to
guard and protect it from every one"; a man who can conduct a case,
carry out a resolution, remain true to an opinion, keep hold of a woman,
punish and overthrow insolence; a man who has his indignation and his
sword, and to whom the weak, the suffering, the oppressed, and even the
animals willingly submit and naturally belong; in short, a man who is a
MASTER by nature--when such a man has sympathy, well! THAT sympathy has
value! But of what account is the sympathy of those who suffer! Or of
those even who preach sympathy! There is nowadays, throughout almost the
whole of Europe, a sickly irritability and sensitiveness towards pain,
and also a repulsive irrestrainableness in complaining, an effeminizing,
which, with the aid of religion and philosophical nonsense, seeks
to deck itself out as something superior--there is a regular cult of
suffering. The UNMANLINESS of that which is called "sympathy" by such
groups of visionaries, is always, I believe, the first thing that
strikes the eye.--One must resolutely and radically taboo this latest
form of bad taste; and finally I wish people to put the good amulet,
"GAI SABER" ("gay science," in ordinary language), on heart and neck, as
a protection against it.

294. THE OLYMPIAN VICE.--Despite the philosopher who, as a genuine
Englishman, tried to bring laughter into bad repute in all thinking
minds--"Laughing is a bad infirmity of human nature, which every
thinking mind will strive to overcome" (Hobbes),--I would even
allow myself to rank philosophers according to the quality of their
laughing--up to those who are capable of GOLDEN laughter. And supposing
that Gods also philosophize, which I am strongly inclined to believe,
owing to many reasons--I have no doubt that they also know how to laugh
thereby in an overman-like and new fashion--and at the expense of all
serious things! Gods are fond of ridicule: it seems that they cannot
refrain from laughter even in holy matters.

295. The genius of the heart, as that great mysterious one possesses
it, the tempter-god and born rat-catcher of consciences, whose voice can
descend into the nether-world of every soul, who neither speaks a word
nor casts a glance in which there may not be some motive or touch
of allurement, to whose perfection it pertains that he knows how to
appear,--not as he is, but in a guise which acts as an ADDITIONAL
constraint on his followers to press ever closer to him, to follow him
more cordially and thoroughly;--the genius of the heart, which imposes
silence and attention on everything loud and self-conceited, which
smoothes rough souls and makes them taste a new longing--to lie placid
as a mirror, that the deep heavens may be reflected in them;--the genius
of the heart, which teaches the clumsy and too hasty hand to hesitate,
and to grasp more delicately; which scents the hidden and forgotten
treasure, the drop of goodness and sweet spirituality under thick dark
ice, and is a divining-rod for every grain of gold, long buried and
imprisoned in mud and sand; the genius of the heart, from contact with
which every one goes away richer; not favoured or surprised, not as
though gratified and oppressed by the good things of others; but richer
in himself, newer than before, broken up, blown upon, and sounded by a
thawing wind; more uncertain, perhaps, more delicate, more fragile, more
bruised, but full of hopes which as yet lack names, full of a new will
and current, full of a new ill-will and counter-current... but what am I
doing, my friends? Of whom am I talking to you? Have I forgotten myself
so far that I have not even told you his name? Unless it be that you
have already divined of your own accord who this questionable God
and spirit is, that wishes to be PRAISED in such a manner? For, as it
happens to every one who from childhood onward has always been on his
legs, and in foreign lands, I have also encountered on my path many
strange and dangerous spirits; above all, however, and again and again,
the one of whom I have just spoken: in fact, no less a personage than
the God DIONYSUS, the great equivocator and tempter, to whom, as you
know, I once offered in all secrecy and reverence my first-fruits--the
last, as it seems to me, who has offered a SACRIFICE to him, for I
have found no one who could understand what I was then doing. In
the meantime, however, I have learned much, far too much, about the
philosophy of this God, and, as I said, from mouth to mouth--I, the last
disciple and initiate of the God Dionysus: and perhaps I might at last
begin to give you, my friends, as far as I am allowed, a little taste of
this philosophy? In a hushed voice, as is but seemly: for it has to do
with much that is secret, new, strange, wonderful, and uncanny. The
very fact that Dionysus is a philosopher, and that therefore Gods also
philosophize, seems to me a novelty which is not unensnaring, and might
perhaps arouse suspicion precisely among philosophers;--among you, my
friends, there is less to be said against it, except that it comes too
late and not at the right time; for, as it has been disclosed to me, you
are loth nowadays to believe in God and gods. It may happen, too, that
in the frankness of my story I must go further than is agreeable to the
strict usages of your ears? Certainly the God in question went further,
very much further, in such dialogues, and was always many paces ahead of
me... Indeed, if it were allowed, I should have to give him, according
to human usage, fine ceremonious tides of lustre and merit, I should
have to extol his courage as investigator and discoverer, his fearless
honesty, truthfulness, and love of wisdom. But such a God does not know
what to do with all that respectable trumpery and pomp. "Keep that," he
would say, "for thyself and those like thee, and whoever else require
it! I--have no reason to cover my nakedness!" One suspects that this
kind of divinity and philosopher perhaps lacks shame?--He once said:
"Under certain circumstances I love mankind"--and referred thereby to
Ariadne, who was present; "in my opinion man is an agreeable, brave,
inventive animal, that has not his equal upon earth, he makes his way
even through all labyrinths. I like man, and often think how I can
still further advance him, and make him stronger, more evil, and more
profound."--"Stronger, more evil, and more profound?" I asked in horror.
"Yes," he said again, "stronger, more evil, and more profound; also more
beautiful"--and thereby the tempter-god smiled with his halcyon smile,
as though he had just paid some charming compliment. One here sees at
once that it is not only shame that this divinity lacks;--and in general
there are good grounds for supposing that in some things the Gods could
all of them come to us men for instruction. We men are--more human.--

296. Alas! what are you, after all, my written and painted thoughts! Not
long ago you were so variegated, young and malicious, so full of thorns
and secret spices, that you made me sneeze and laugh--and now? You
have already doffed your novelty, and some of you, I fear, are ready
to become truths, so immortal do they look, so pathetically honest, so
tedious! And was it ever otherwise? What then do we write and paint,
we mandarins with Chinese brush, we immortalisers of things which LEND
themselves to writing, what are we alone capable of painting? Alas, only
that which is just about to fade and begins to lose its odour! Alas,
only exhausted and departing storms and belated yellow sentiments! Alas,
only birds strayed and fatigued by flight, which now let themselves be
captured with the hand--with OUR hand! We immortalize what cannot live
and fly much longer, things only which are exhausted and mellow! And it
is only for your AFTERNOON, you, my written and painted thoughts, for
which alone I have colours, many colours, perhaps, many variegated
softenings, and fifty yellows and browns and greens and reds;--but
nobody will divine thereby how ye looked in your morning, you sudden
sparks and marvels of my solitude, you, my old, beloved--EVIL thoughts!

   BOOK FIRST


                                   1.

_The Teachers of the Object of Existence._—Whether I look with a good or
an evil eye upon men, I find them always at one problem, each and all of
them: to do that which conduces to the conservation of the human
species. And certainly not out of any sentiment of love for this
species, but simply because nothing in them is older, stronger, more
inexorable, and more unconquerable than that instinct,—because it is
precisely _the essence_ of our race and herd. Although we are accustomed
readily enough, with our usual short-sightedness, to separate our
neighbours precisely into useful and hurtful, into good and evil men,
yet when we make a general calculation, and on longer reflection on the
whole question, we become distrustful of this defining and separating,
and finally leave it alone. Even the most hurtful man is still perhaps,
in respect to the conservation of the race, the most useful of all; for
he conserves in himself or by his effect on others, impulses without
which mankind might long ago have languished or decayed. Hatred, delight
in mischief, rapacity and ambition, and whatever else is called
evil—belong to the marvellous economy of the conservation of the race;
to be sure a costly, lavish, and on the whole very foolish
economy:—which has, however, hitherto preserved our race, _as is
demonstrated to us_. I no longer know, my dear fellow-man and neighbour,
if thou _canst_ at all live to the disadvantage of the race, and
therefore, "unreasonably" and "badly"; that which could have injured the
race has perhaps died out many millenniums ago, and now belongs to the
things which are no longer possible even to God. Indulge thy best or thy
worst desires, and above all, go to wreck!—in either case thou art still
probably the furtherer and benefactor of mankind in some way or other,
and in that respect thou mayest have thy panegyrists—and similarly thy
mockers! But thou wilt never find him who would be quite qualified to
mock at thee, the individual, at thy best, who could bring home to thy
conscience its limitless, buzzing and croaking wretchedness so as to be
in accord with truth! To laugh at oneself as one would have to laugh in
order to laugh _out of the veriest truth_,—to do this the best have not
hitherto had enough of the sense of truth, and the most endowed have had
far too little genius! There is perhaps still a future even for
laughter! When the maxim, "The race is all, the individual is
nothing,"—has incorporated itself in humanity, and when access stands
open to every one at all times to this ultimate emancipation and
irresponsibility.—Perhaps then laughter will have united with wisdom,
perhaps then there will be only "joyful wisdom." Meanwhile, however, it
is quite otherwise, meanwhile the comedy of existence has not yet
"become conscious" of itself, meanwhile it is still the period of
tragedy, the period of morals and religions. What does the ever new
appearing of founders of morals and religions, of instigators of
struggles for moral valuations, of teachers of remorse of conscience and
religious war, imply? What do these heroes on this stage imply? For they
have hitherto been the heroes of it, and all else, though solely visible
for the time being, and too close to one, has served only as preparation
for these heroes, whether as machinery and coulisse, or in the rôle of
confidants and valets. (The poets, for example, have always been the
valets of some morality or other.)—It is obvious of itself that these
tragedians also work in the interest of the _race_, though they may
believe that they work in the interest of God, and as emissaries of God.
They also further the life of the species, _in that they further the
belief in life_. "It is worth while to live"—each of them calls
out,—"there is something of importance in this life; life has something
behind it and under it; take care!" That impulse, which rules equally in
the noblest and the ignoblest, the impulse towards the conservation of
the species, breaks forth from time to time as reason and passion of
spirit; it has then a brilliant train of motives about it, and tries
with all its power to make us forget that fundamentally it is just
impulse, instinct, folly and baselessness. Life _should_ be loved, _for_
...! Man _should_ benefit himself and his neighbour, _for_ ...! And
whatever all these _shoulds_ and _fors_ imply, and may imply in future!
In order that that which necessarily and always happens of itself and
without design, may henceforth appear to be done by design, and may
appeal to men as reason and ultimate command,—for that purpose the
ethiculturist comes forward as the teacher of design in existence; for
that purpose he devises a second and different existence, and by means
of this new mechanism he lifts the old common existence off its old
common hinges. No! he does not at all want us to _laugh_ at existence,
nor even at ourselves—nor at himself; to him an individual is always an
individual, something first and last and immense, to him there are no
species, no sums, no noughts. However foolish and fanatical his
inventions and valuations may be, however much he may misunderstand the
course of nature and deny its conditions—and all systems of ethics
hitherto have been foolish and anti-natural to such a degree that
mankind would have been ruined by any one of them had it got the upper
hand,—at any rate, every time that "the hero" came upon the stage
something new was attained: the frightful counterpart of laughter, the
profound convulsion of many individuals at the thought, "Yes, it is
worth while to live! yes, I am worthy to live!"—life, and thou, and I,
and all of us together became for a while _interesting_ to ourselves
once more.—It is not to be denied that hitherto laughter and reason and
nature have _in the long run_ got the upper hand of all the great
teachers of design: in the end the short tragedy always passed over once
more into the eternal comedy of existence; and the "waves of innumerable
laughters"—to use the expression of Æschylus—must also in the end beat
over the greatest of these tragedies. But with all this corrective
laughter, human nature has on the whole been changed by the ever new
appearance of those teachers of the design of existence,—human nature
has now an additional requirement, the very requirement of the ever new
appearance of such teachers and doctrines of "design." Man has gradually
become a visionary animal, who has to fulfil one more condition of
existence than the other animals: man _must_ from time to time believe
that he knows _why_ he exists; his species cannot flourish without
periodically confiding in life! Without the belief in _reason in life_!
And always from time to time will the human race decree anew that "there
is something which really may not be laughed at." And the most
clairvoyant philanthropist will add that "not only laughing and joyful
wisdom, but also the tragic, with all its sublime irrationality, counts
among the means and necessities for the conservation of the race!"—And
consequently! Consequently! Consequently! Do you understand me, oh my
brothers? Do you understand this new law of ebb and flow? We also shall
have our time!


                                   2.

_The Intellectual Conscience._—I have always the same experience over
again, and always make a new effort against it; for although it is
evident to me I do not want to believe it: _in the greater number of men
the intellectual conscience is lacking_; indeed, it would often seem to
me that in demanding such a thing, one is as solitary in the largest
cities as in the desert. Everyone looks at you with strange eyes, and
continues to make use of his scales, calling this good and that bad; and
no one blushes for shame when you remark that these weights are not the
full amount,—there is also no indignation against you; perhaps they
laugh at your doubt. I mean to say that _the greater number of people_
do not find it contemptible to believe this or that, and live according
to it, _without_ having been previously aware of the ultimate and surest
reasons for and against it, and without even giving themselves any
trouble about such reasons afterwards,—the most gifted men and the
noblest women still belong to this "greater number." But what is
kind-heartedness, refinement and genius to me, if the man with these
virtues harbours indolent sentiments in belief and judgment, if _the
longing for certainty_ does not rule in him, as his innermost desire and
profoundest need—as that which separates higher from lower men! In
certain pious people I have found a hatred of reason, and have been
favourably disposed to them for it: their bad, intellectual conscience
still betrayed itself, at least in this manner! But to stand in the
midst of this _rerum concordia discors_ and all the marvellous
uncertainty and ambiguity of existence, _and not to question_, not to
tremble with desire and delight in questioning, not even to hate the
questioner—perhaps even to make merry over him to the extent of
weariness—that is what I regard as _contemptible_, and it is this
sentiment which I first of all search for in every one:—some folly or
other always persuades me anew that every man has this sentiment, as
man. This is my special kind of unrighteousness.


                                   3.

_Noble and Ignoble._—To ignoble natures all noble, magnanimous
sentiments appear inexpedient, and on that account first and foremost,
as incredible: they blink with their eyes when they hear of such
matters, and seem inclined to say, "there will, no doubt, be some
advantage therefrom, one cannot see through all walls;"—they are jealous
of the noble person, as if he sought advantage by back-stair methods.
When they are all too plainly convinced of the absence of selfish
intentions and emoluments, the noble person is regarded by them as a
kind of fool: they despise him in his gladness, and laugh at the lustre
of his eye. "How can a person rejoice at being at a disadvantage, how
can a person with open eyes want to meet with disadvantage! It must be a
disease of the reason with which the noble affection is associated,"—so
they think, and they look depreciatingly thereon; just as they
depreciate the joy which the lunatic derives from his fixed idea. The
ignoble nature is distinguished by the fact that it keeps its advantage
steadily in view, and that this thought of the end and advantage is even
stronger than its strongest impulse: not to be tempted to inexpedient
activities by its impulses—that is its wisdom and inspiration. In
comparison with the ignoble nature the higher nature is _more
irrational_:—for the noble, magnanimous, and self-sacrificing person
succumbs in fact to his impulses, and in his best moments his reason
_lapses_ altogether. An animal, which at the risk of life protects its
young, or in the pairing season follows the female where it meets with
death, does not think of the risk and the death; its reason pauses
likewise, because its delight in its young, or in the female, and the
fear of being deprived of this delight, dominate it exclusively; it
becomes stupider than at other times, like the noble and magnanimous
person. He possesses feelings of pleasure and pain of such intensity
that the intellect must either be silent before them, or yield itself to
their service: his heart then goes into his head, and one henceforth
speaks of "passions." (Here and there to be sure, the antithesis to
this, and as it were the "reverse of passion," presents itself; for
example in Fontenelle, to whom some one once laid the hand on the heart
with the words, "What you have there, my dearest friend, is brain
also.") It is the unreason, or perverse reason of passion, which the
ignoble man despises in the noble individual, especially when it
concentrates upon objects whose value appears to him to be altogether
fantastic and arbitrary. He is offended at him who succumbs to the
passion of the belly, but he understands the allurement which here plays
the tyrant; but he does not understand, for example, how a person out of
love of knowledge can stake his health and honour on the game. The taste
of the higher nature devotes itself to exceptional matters, to things
which usually do not affect people, and seem to have no sweetness; the
higher nature has a singular standard of value. Besides, it is mostly of
the belief that it has _not_ a singular standard of value in its
idiosyncrasies of taste; it rather sets up its values and non-values as
the generally valid values and non-values, and thus becomes
incomprehensible and impracticable. It is very rarely that a higher
nature has so much reason over and above as to understand and deal with
everyday men as such; for the most part it believes in its passion as if
it were the concealed passion of every one, and precisely in this belief
it is full of ardour and eloquence. If then such exceptional men do not
perceive themselves as exceptions, how can they ever understand the
ignoble natures and estimate average men fairly! Thus it is that they
also speak of the folly, inexpediency and fantasy of mankind, full of
astonishment at the madness of the world, and that it will not recognise
the "one thing needful for it."—This is the eternal unrighteousness of
noble natures.


                                   4.

_That which Preserves the Species._—The strongest and most evil spirits
have hitherto advanced mankind the most: they always rekindled the
sleeping passions—all orderly arranged society lulls the passions to
sleep; they always reawakened the sense of comparison, of contradiction,
of delight in the new, the adventurous, the untried; they compelled men
to set opinion against opinion, ideal plan against ideal plan. By means
of arms, by upsetting boundary-stones, by violations of piety most of
all: but also by new religions and morals! The same kind of "wickedness"
is in every teacher and preacher of the _new_—which makes a conqueror
infamous, although it expresses itself more refinedly, and does not
immediately set the muscles in motion (and just on that account does not
make so infamous!). The new, however, is under all circumstances the
_evil_, as that which wants to conquer, which tries to upset the old
boundary-stones and the old piety; only the old is the good! The good
men of every age are those who go to the roots of the old thoughts and
bear fruit with them, the agriculturists of the spirit. But every soil
becomes finally exhausted, and the ploughshare of evil must always come
once more.—There is at present a fundamentally erroneous theory of
morals which is much celebrated, especially in England: according to it
the judgments "good" and "evil" are the accumulation of the experiences
of that which is "expedient" and "inexpedient"; according to this
theory, that which is called good is conservative of the species, what
is called evil, however, is detrimental to it. But in reality the evil
impulses are just in as high a degree expedient, indispensable, and
conservative of the species as the good:—only, their function is
different.


                                   5.

_Unconditional Duties._—All men who feel that they need the strongest
words and intonations, the most eloquent gestures and attitudes, in
order to operate _at all_—revolutionary politicians, socialists,
preachers of repentance with or without Christianity, with all of whom
there must be no mere half-success,—all these speak of "duties," and
indeed, always of duties, which have the character of being
unconditional—without such they would have no right to their excessive
pathos: they know that right well! They grasp, therefore, at
philosophies of morality which preach some kind of categorical
imperative, or they assimilate a good lump of religion, as, for example,
Mazzini did. Because they want to be trusted unconditionally, it is
first of all necessary for them to trust themselves unconditionally, on
the basis of some ultimate, undebatable command, sublime in itself, as
the ministers and instruments of which, they would fain feel and
announce themselves. Here we have the most natural, and for the most
part, very influential opponents of moral enlightenment and scepticism:
but they are rare. On the other hand, there is always a very numerous
class of those opponents wherever interest teaches subjection, while
repute and honour seem to forbid it. He who feels himself dishonoured at
the thought of being the _instrument_ of a prince, or of a party and
sect, or even of wealthy power (for example, as the descendant of a
proud, ancient family), but wishes just to be this instrument, or must
be so before himself and before the public—such a person has need of
pathetic principles which can at all times be appealed to:—principles of
an unconditional _ought_, to which a person can subject himself without
shame, and can show himself subjected. All more refined servility holds
fast to the categorical imperative, and is the mortal enemy of those who
want to take away the unconditional character of duty: propriety demands
this from them, and not only propriety.


                                   6.

_Loss of Dignity._—Meditation has lost all its dignity of form; the
ceremonial and solemn bearing of the meditative person have been made a
mockery, and one would no longer endure a wise man of the old style. We
think too hastily and on the way and while walking and in the midst of
business of all kinds, even when we think on the most serious matters;
we require little preparation, even little quiet:—it is as if each of us
carried about an unceasingly revolving machine in his head, which still
works, even under the most unfavourable circumstances. Formerly it was
perceived in a person that on some occasion he wanted to think—it was
perhaps the exception!—that he now wanted to become wiser and collected
his mind on a thought: he put on a long face for it, as for a prayer,
and arrested his step—nay, stood still for hours on the street when the
thought "came"—on one or on two legs. It was thus "worthy of the
affair"!


                                   7.

_Something for the Laborious._—He who at present wants to make moral
questions a subject of study has an immense field of labour before him.
All kinds of passions must be thought about singly, and followed singly
throughout periods, peoples, great and insignificant individuals; all
their rationality, all their valuations and elucidations of things,
ought to come to light! Hitherto all that has given colour to existence
has lacked a history: where would one find a history of love, of
avarice, of envy, of conscience, of piety, of cruelty? Even a
comparative history of law, as also of punishment, has hitherto been
completely lacking. Have the different divisions of the day, the
consequences of a regular appointment of the times for labour, feast,
and repose, ever been made the object of investigation? Do we know the
moral effects of the alimentary substances? Is there a philosophy of
nutrition? (The ever-recurring outcry for and against vegetarianism
proves that as yet there is no such philosophy!) Have the experiences
with regard to communal living, for example, in monasteries, been
collected? Has the dialectic of marriage and friendship been set forth?
The customs of the learned, of trades-people, of artists, and of
mechanics—have they already found their thinkers? There is so much to
think of thereon! All that up till now has been considered as the
"conditions of existence," of human beings, and all reason, passion and
superstition in this consideration—have they been investigated to the
end? The observation alone of the different degrees of development which
the human impulses have attained, and could yet attain, according to the
different moral climates, would furnish too much work for the most
laborious; whole generations, and regular co-operating generations of
the learned, would be needed in order to exhaust the points of view and
the material here furnished. The same is true of the determining of the
reasons for the differences of the moral climates ("_on what account_
does this sun of a fundamental moral judgment and standard of highest
value shine here—and that sun there?"). And there is again a new labour
which points out the erroneousness of all these reasons, and determines
the entire essence of the moral judgments hitherto made. Supposing all
these labours to be accomplished, the most critical of all questions
would then come into the foreground: whether science is in a position to
_furnish_ goals for human action, after it has proved that it can take
them away and annihilate them—and then would be the time for a process
of experimenting in which every kind of heroism could satisfy itself, an
experimenting for centuries, which would put into the shade all the
great labours and sacrifices of previous history. Science has not
hitherto built its Cyclopic structures; for that also the time will
come.


                                   8.

_Unconscious Virtues._—All qualities in a man of which he is
conscious—and especially when he presumes that they are visible and
evident to his environment also—are subject to quite other laws of
development than those qualities which are unknown to him, or
imperfectly known, which by their subtlety can also conceal themselves
from the subtlest observer, and hide as it were behind nothing,—as in
the case of the delicate sculptures on the scales of reptiles (it would
be an error to suppose them an adornment or a defence—for one sees them
only with the microscope; consequently, with an eye artificially
strengthened to an extent of vision which similar animals, to which they
might perhaps have meant adornment or defence, do not possess!) Our
visible moral qualities, and especially our moral qualities _believed to
be_ visible, follow their own course,—and our invisible qualities of
similar name, which in relation to others neither serve for adornment
nor defence, _also follow their own course_: quite a different course
probably, and with lines and refinements, and sculptures, which might
perhaps give pleasure to a God with a divine microscope. We have, for
example, our diligence, our ambition, our acuteness: all the world knows
about them,—and besides, we have probably once more _our_ diligence,
_our_ ambition, _our_ acuteness; but for these—our reptile scales—the
microscope has not yet been invented!—And here the adherents of
instinctive morality will say, "Bravo! He at least regards unconscious
virtues as possible—that suffices us!"—Oh, ye unexacting creatures!


                                   9.

_Our Eruptions._—Numberless things which humanity acquired in its
earlier stages, but so weakly and embryonically that it could not be
noticed that they were acquired, are thrust suddenly into light long
afterwards, perhaps after the lapse of centuries: they have in the
interval become strong and mature. In some ages this or that talent,
this or that virtue seems to be entirely lacking, as it is in some men;
but let us wait only for the grandchildren and grandchildren's children,
if we have time to wait,—they bring the interior of their grandfathers
into the sun, that interior of which the grandfathers themselves were
unconscious. The son, indeed, is often the betrayer of his father; the
latter understands himself better since he has got his son. We have all
hidden gardens and plantations in us; and by another simile, we are all
growing volcanoes, which will have their hours of eruption:—how near or
how distant this is, nobody of course knows, not even the good God.


                                  10.

_A Species of Atavism._—I like best to think of the rare men of an age
as suddenly emerging aftershoots of past cultures, and of their
persistent strength: like the atavism of a people and its
civilisation:—there is thus still something in them to _think of_! They
now seem strange, rare, and extraordinary: and he who feels these forces
in himself has to foster them in face of a different, opposing world; he
has to defend them, honour them, and rear them to maturity: and he
either becomes a great man thereby, or a deranged and eccentric person,
unless he should altogether break down betimes. Formerly these rare
qualities were usual, and were consequently regarded as common: they did
not distinguish people. Perhaps they were demanded and presupposed; it
was impossible to become great with them, for indeed there was also no
danger of becoming insane and solitary with them.—It is principally in
the _old-established_ families and castes of a people that such
after-effects of old impulses present themselves, while there is no
probability of such atavism where races, habits, and valuations change
too rapidly. For the _tempo_ of the evolutional forces in peoples
implies just as much as in music; for our case an _andante_ of evolution
is absolutely necessary, as the _tempo_ of a passionate and slow
spirit:—and the spirit of conserving families is certainly of _that_
sort.


                                  11.

_Consciousness._—Consciousness is the last and latest development of the
organic, and consequently also the most unfinished and least powerful of
these developments. Innumerable mistakes originate out of consciousness,
which, "in spite of fate," as Homer says, cause an animal or a man to
break down earlier than might be necessary. If the conserving bond of
the instincts were not very much more powerful, it would not generally
serve as a regulator: by perverse judging and dreaming with open eyes,
by superficiality and credulity, in short, just by consciousness,
mankind would necessarily have broken down: or rather, without the
former there would long ago have been nothing more of the latter! Before
a function is fully formed and matured, it is a danger to the organism:
all the better if it be then thoroughly tyrannised over! Consciousness
is thus thoroughly tyrannised over—and not least by the pride in it! It
is thought that here is _the quintessence_ of man; that which is
enduring, eternal, ultimate, and most original in him! Consciousness is
regarded as a fixed, given magnitude! Its growth and intermittences are
denied! It is accepted as the "unity of the organism"!—This ludicrous
overvaluation and misconception of consciousness, has as its result the
great utility, that a too rapid maturing of it has thereby been
_hindered_. Because men believed that they already possessed
consciousness, they gave themselves very little trouble to acquire
it—and even now it is not otherwise! It is still an entirely new
_problem_ just dawning on the human eye and hardly yet plainly
recognisable: _to embody knowledge in ourselves_ and make it
instinctive,—a problem which is only seen by those who have grasped the
fact that hitherto our _errors_ alone have been embodied in us, and that
all our consciousness is relative to errors!


                                  12.

_The Goal of Science._—What? The ultimate goal of science is to create
the most pleasure possible to man, and the least possible pain? But what
if pleasure and pain should be so closely connected that he who _wants_
the greatest possible amount of the one _must_ also have the greatest
possible amount of the other,—that he who wants to experience the
"heavenly high jubilation,"[7] must also be ready to be "sorrowful unto
death"?(ref. same footnote) And it is so, perhaps! The Stoics at least
believed it was so, and they were consistent when they wished to have
the least possible pleasure, in order to have the least possible pain
from life. (When one uses the expression: "The virtuous man is the
happiest," it is as much the sign-board of the school for the masses, as
a casuistic subtlety for the subtle.) At present also ye have still the
choice: either the _least possible pain_, in short painlessness—and
after all, socialists and politicians of all parties could not
honourably promise more to their people,—or the _greatest possible
amount of pain_, as the price of the growth of a fullness of refined
delights and enjoyments rarely tasted hitherto! If ye decide for the
former, if ye therefore want to depress and minimise man's capacity for
pain, well, ye must also depress and minimise his _capacity for
enjoyment_. In fact, one can further the one as well as the other goal
_by science_! Perhaps science is as yet best known by its capacity for
depriving man of enjoyment, and making him colder, more statuesque, and
more Stoical. But it might also turn out to be the _great
pain-bringer_!—And then, perhaps, its counteracting force would be
discovered simultaneously, its immense capacity for making new sidereal
worlds of enjoyment beam forth!


                                  13.

_The Theory of the Sense of Power._—We exercise our power over others by
doing them good or by doing them ill—that is all we care for! _Doing
ill_ to those on whom we have to make our power felt; for pain is a far
more sensitive means for that purpose than pleasure:—pain always asks
concerning the cause, while pleasure is inclined to keep within itself
and not look backward. _Doing good_ and being kind to those who are in
any way already dependent on us (that is, who are accustomed to think of
us as their _raison d'être_); we want to increase their power, because
we thus increase our own; or we want to show them the advantage there is
in being in our power,—they thus become more contented with their
position, and more hostile to the enemies of _our_ power and readier to
contend with them. If we make sacrifices in doing good or in doing ill,
it does not alter the ultimate value of our actions; even if we stake
our life in the cause, as martyrs for the sake of our church, it is a
sacrifice to _our_ longing for power, or for the purpose of conserving
our sense of power. He who under these circumstances feels that he "is
in possession of truth," how many possessions does he not let go, in
order to preserve this feeling! What does he not throw overboard, in
order to keep himself "up,"—that is to say, _above_ the others who lack
the "truth"! Certainly the condition we are in when we do ill is seldom
so pleasant, so purely pleasant, as that in which we practise
kindness,—it is an indication that we still lack power, or it betrays
ill-humour at this defect in us; it brings with it new dangers and
uncertainties as to the power we already possess, and clouds our horizon
by the prospect of revenge, scorn, punishment and failure. Perhaps only
those most susceptible to the sense of power, and eager for it, will
prefer to impress the seal of power on the resisting individual,—those
to whom the sight of the already subjugated person as the object of
benevolence is a burden and a tedium. It is a question how a person is
accustomed to _season_ his life; it is a matter of taste whether a
person would rather have the slow or the sudden, the safe or the
dangerous and daring increase of power,—he seeks this or that seasoning
always according to his temperament. An easy booty is something
contemptible to proud natures; they have an agreeable sensation only at
the sight of men of unbroken spirit who could be enemies to them, and
similarly, also, at the sight of all not easily accessible possession;
they are often hard toward the sufferer, for he is not worthy of their
effort or their pride,—but they show themselves so much the more
courteous towards their _equals_, with whom strife and struggle would in
any case be full of honour, _if_ at any time an occasion for it should
present itself. It is under the agreeable feelings of _this_ perspective
that the members of the knightly caste have habituated themselves to
exquisite courtesy toward one another.—Pity is the most pleasant feeling
in those who have not much pride, and have no prospect of great
conquests: the easy booty—and that is what every sufferer is—is for them
an enchanting thing. Pity is said to be the virtue of the gay lady.


                                  14.

_What is called Love._—The lust of property and love: what different
associations each of these ideas evoke!—and yet it might be the same
impulse twice named: on the one occasion disparaged from the standpoint
of those already possessing (in whom the impulse has attained something
of repose, and who are now apprehensive for the safety of their
"possession"); on the other occasion viewed from the standpoint of the
unsatisfied and thirsty, and therefore glorified as "good." Our love of
our neighbour,—is it not a striving after new _property_? And similarly
our love of knowledge, of truth; and in general all the striving after
novelties? We gradually become satiated with the old, the securely
possessed, and again stretch out our hands; even the finest landscape in
which we live for three months is no longer certain of our love, and any
kind of more distant coast excites our covetousness: the possession for
the most part becomes smaller through possessing. Our pleasure in
ourselves seeks to maintain itself, by always transforming something new
_into ourselves_,—that is just possessing. To become satiated with a
possession, that is to become satiated with ourselves. (One can also
suffer from excess,—even the desire to cast away, to share out, can
assume the honourable name of "love.") When we see any one suffering, we
willingly utilise the opportunity then afforded to take possession of
him; the beneficent and sympathetic man, for example, does this; he also
calls the desire for new possession awakened in him, by the name of
"love," and has enjoyment in it, as in a new acquisition suggesting
itself to him. The love of the sexes, however, betrays itself most
plainly as the striving after possession: the lover wants the
unconditioned, sole possession of the person longed for by him; he wants
just as absolute power over her soul as over her body; he wants to be
loved solely, and to dwell and rule in the other soul as what is highest
and most to be desired. When one considers that this means precisely to
_exclude_ all the world from a precious possession, a happiness, and an
enjoyment; when one considers that the lover has in view the
impoverishment and privation of all other rivals, and would like to
become the dragon of his golden hoard, as the most inconsiderate and
selfish of all "conquerors" and exploiters; when one considers finally
that to the lover himself, the whole world besides appears indifferent,
colourless, and worthless, and that he is ready to make every sacrifice,
disturb every arrangement, and put every other interest behind his
own,—one is verily surprised that this ferocious lust of property and
injustice of sexual love should have been glorified and deified to such
an extent at all times; yea, that out of this love the conception of
love as the antithesis of egoism should have been derived, when it is
perhaps precisely the most unqualified expression of egoism. Here,
evidently, the non-possessors and desirers have determined the usage of
language,—there were, of course, always too many of them. Those who have
been favoured with much possession and satiety, have, to be sure,
dropped a word now and then about the "raging demon," as, for instance,
the most lovable and most beloved of all the Athenians—Sophocles; but
Eros always laughed at such revilers,—they were always his greatest
favourites.—There is, of course, here and there on this terrestrial
sphere a kind of sequel to love, in which that covetous longing of two
persons for one another has yielded to a new desire and covetousness, to
a _common_, higher thirst for a superior ideal standing above them: but
who knows this love? Who has experienced it? Its right name is
_friendship_.


                                  15.

_Out of the Distance._—This mountain makes the whole district which it
dominates charming in every way, and full of significance: after we have
said this to ourselves for the hundredth time, we are so irrationally
and so gratefully disposed towards it, as the giver of this charm, that
we fancy it must itself be the most charming thing in the district—and
so we climb it, and are undeceived. All of a sudden, it itself, and the
whole landscape around and under us, is as it were disenchanted; we had
forgotten that many a greatness, like many a goodness, wants only to be
seen at a certain distance, and entirely from below, not from above,—it
is thus only that _it operates_. Perhaps you know men in your
neighbourhood who can only look at themselves from a certain distance to
find themselves at all endurable, or attractive and enlivening; they are
to be dissuaded from self-knowledge.


                                  16.

_Across the Plank._—One must be able to dissimulate in intercourse with
persons who are ashamed of their feelings; they experience a sudden
aversion towards anyone who surprises them in a state of tender, or
enthusiastic and high-running feeling, as if he had seen their secrets.
If one wants to be kind to them in such moments one should make them
laugh, or say some kind of cold, playful wickedness:—their feeling
thereby congeals, and they are again self-possessed. But I give the
moral before the story.—We were once on a time so near one another in
the course of our lives, that nothing more seemed to hinder our
friendship and fraternity, and there was merely a small plank between
us. While you were just about to step on it, I asked you: "Do you want
to come across the plank to me?" But then you did not want to come any
longer; and when I again entreated, you were silent. Since then
mountains and torrents, and whatever separates and alienates, have
interposed between us, and even if we wanted to come to one another, we
could no longer do so! When, however, you now remember that small plank,
you have no longer words,—but merely sobs and amazement.


                                  17.

_Motivation of Poverty._—We cannot, to be sure, by any artifice make a
rich and richly-flowing virtue out of a poor one, but we can gracefully
enough reinterpret its poverty into necessity, so that its aspect no
longer gives pain to us, and we do not make any reproachful faces at
fate on account of it. It is thus that the wise gardener does, who puts
the tiny streamlet of his garden into the arms of a fountain-nymph, and
thus motivates the poverty:—and who would not like him need the nymphs!


                                  18.

_Ancient Pride._—The ancient savour of nobility is lacking in us,
because the ancient slave is lacking in our sentiment. A Greek of noble
descent found such immense intermediate stages, and such a distance
betwixt his elevation and that ultimate baseness, that he could hardly
even see the slave plainly: even Plato no longer saw him entirely. It is
otherwise with us, accustomed as we are to the _doctrine_ of the
equality of men, although not to the equality itself. A being who has
not the free disposal of himself and has not got leisure,—that is not
regarded by us as anything contemptible; there is perhaps too much of
this kind of slavishness in each of us, in accordance with the
conditions of our social order and activity, which are fundamentally
different from those of the ancients.—The Greek philosopher went through
life with the secret feeling that there were many more slaves than
people supposed—that is to say, that every one was a slave who was not a
philosopher. His pride was puffed up when he considered that even the
mightiest of the earth were thus to be looked upon as slaves. This pride
is also unfamiliar to us, and impossible; the word "slave" has not its
full force for us even in simile.


                                  19.

_Evil._—Test the life of the best and most productive men and nations,
and ask yourselves whether a tree which is to grow proudly heavenward
can dispense with bad weather and tempests: whether disfavour and
opposition from without, whether every kind of hatred, jealousy,
stubbornness, distrust, severity, greed, and violence do not belong to
the _favouring_ circumstances without which a great growth even in
virtue is hardly possible? The poison by which the weaker nature is
destroyed is strengthening to the strong individual—and he does not call
it poison.


                                  20.

_Dignity of Folly._—Several millenniums further on in the path of the
last century!—and in everything that man does the highest prudence will
be exhibited: but just thereby prudence will have lost all its dignity.
It will then, sure enough, be necessary to be prudent, but it will also
be so usual and common, that a more fastidious taste will feel this
necessity as _vulgarity_. And just as a tyranny of truth and science
would be in a position to raise the value of falsehood, a tyranny of
prudence could force into prominence a new species of nobleness. To be
noble—that might then mean, perhaps, to be capable of follies.


                                  21.

_To the Teachers of Unselfishness._—The virtues of a man are called
_good_, not in respect of the results they have for himself, but in
respect of the results which we expect therefrom for ourselves and for
society:—we have all along had very little unselfishness, very little
"non-egoism" in our praise of the virtues! For otherwise it could not
but have been seen that the virtues (such as diligence, obedience,
chastity, piety, justice) are mostly _injurious_ to their possessors, as
impulses which rule in them too vehemently and ardently, and do not want
to be kept in co-ordination with the other impulses by the reason. If
you have a virtue, an actual, perfect virtue (and not merely a kind of
impulse towards virtue!)—you are its _victim_! But your neighbour
praises your virtue precisely on that account! One praises the diligent
man though he injures his sight, or the originality and freshness of his
spirit, by his diligence; the youth is honoured and regretted who has
"worn himself out by work," because one passes the judgment that "for
society as a whole the loss of the best individual is only a small
sacrifice! A pity that this sacrifice should be necessary! A much
greater pity, it is true, if the individual should think differently,
and regard his preservation and development as more important than his
work in the service of society!" And so one regrets this youth, not on
his own account, but because a devoted _instrument_, regardless of
self—a so-called "good man," has been lost to society by his death.
Perhaps one further considers the question, whether it would not have
been more advantageous for the interests of society if he had laboured
with less disregard of himself, and had preserved himself
longer,—indeed, one readily admits an advantage therefrom, but one
esteems the other advantage, namely, that a _sacrifice_ has been made,
and that the disposition of the sacrificial animal has once more been
_obviously_ endorsed—as higher and more enduring. It is accordingly, on
the one part, the instrumental character in the virtues which is praised
when the virtues are praised, and on the other part, the blind, ruling
impulse in every virtue, which refuses to let itself be kept within
bounds by the general advantage to the individual; in short, what is
praised is the unreason in the virtues, in consequence of which the
individual allows himself to be transformed into a function of the
whole. The praise of the virtues is the praise of something which is
privately injurious to the individual; it is praise of impulses which
deprive man of his noblest self-love, and the power to take the best
care of himself. To be sure, for the teaching and embodying of virtuous
habits a series of effects of virtue are displayed, which make it appear
that virtue and private advantage are closely related,—and there is in
fact such a relationship! Blindly furious diligence, for example, the
typical virtue of an instrument, is represented as the way to riches and
honour, and as the most beneficial antidote to tedium and passion: but
people are silent concerning its danger, its greatest dangerousness.
Education proceeds in this manner throughout: it endeavours, by a series
of enticements and advantages, to determine the individual to a certain
mode of thinking and acting, which, when it has become habit, impulse
and passion, rules in him and over him, _in opposition to his ultimate
advantage_, but "for the general good." How often do I see that blindly
furious diligence does indeed create riches and honours, but at the same
time deprives the organs of the refinement by virtue of which alone an
enjoyment of riches and honours is possible; so that really the main
expedient for combating tedium and passion, simultaneously blunts the
senses and makes the spirit refractory towards new stimuli! (The busiest
of all ages—our age—does not know how to make anything out of its great
diligence and wealth, except always more and more wealth, and more and
more diligence; there is even more genius needed for laying out wealth
than for acquiring it!—Well, we shall have our "grandchildren"!) If the
education succeeds, every virtue of the individual is a public utility,
and a private disadvantage in respect to the highest private
end,—probably some psycho-æsthetic stunting, or even premature
dissolution. One should consider successively from the same standpoint
the virtues of obedience, chastity, piety, and justice. The praise of
the unselfish, self-sacrificing, virtuous person—he, consequently, who
does not expend his whole energy and reason for _his own_ conservation,
development, elevation, furtherance and augmentation of power, but lives
as regards himself unassumingly and thoughtlessly, perhaps even
indifferently or ironically,—this praise has in any case not originated
out of the spirit of unselfishness! The "neighbour" praises
unselfishness because _he profits by it_! If the neighbour were
"unselfishly" disposed himself, he would reject that destruction of
power, that injury for _his_ advantage, he would thwart such
inclinations in their origin, and above all he would manifest his
unselfishness just by _not giving it a good name_! The fundamental
contradiction in that morality which at present stands in high honour is
here indicated: the _motives_ to such a morality are in antithesis to
its _principle_! That with which this morality wishes to prove itself,
refutes it out of its criterion of what is moral! The maxim, "Thou shalt
renounce thyself and offer thyself as a sacrifice," in order not to be
inconsistent with its own morality, could only be decreed by a being who
himself renounced his own advantage thereby, and who perhaps in the
required self-sacrifice of individuals brought about his own
dissolution. As soon, however, as the neighbour (or society) recommended
altruism _on account of its utility_, the precisely antithetical
proposition, "Thou shalt seek thy advantage even at the expense of
everybody else," was brought into use: accordingly, "thou shalt," and
"thou shalt not," are preached in one breath!


                                  22.

_L'Ordre du Jour pour le Roi._—The day commences: let us begin to
arrange for this day the business and fêtes of our most gracious lord,
who at present is still pleased to repose. His Majesty has bad weather
to-day: we shall be careful not to call it bad; we shall not speak of
the weather,—but we shall go through to-day's business somewhat more
ceremoniously and make the fêtes somewhat more festive than would
otherwise be necessary. His Majesty may perhaps even be sick: we shall
give the last good news of the evening at breakfast, the arrival of M.
Montaigne, who knows how to joke so pleasantly about his sickness,—he
suffers from stone. We shall receive several persons (persons!—what
would that old inflated frog, who will be among them, say, if he heard
this word! "I am no person," he would say, "but always the thing
itself")—and the reception will last longer than is pleasant to anybody;
a sufficient reason for telling about the poet who wrote over his door,
"He who enters here will do me an honour; he who does not—a
favour."—That is, forsooth, saying a discourteous thing in a courteous
manner! And perhaps this poet is quite justified on his part in being
discourteous; they say that the rhymes are better than the rhymester.
Well, let him still make many of them, and withdraw himself as much as
possible from the world: and that is doubtless the significance of his
well-bred rudeness! A prince, on the other hand, is always of more value
than his "verse," even when—but what are we about? We gossip, and the
whole court believes that we have already been at work and racked our
brains: there is no light to be seen earlier than that which burns in
our window.—Hark! Was that not the bell? The devil! The day and the
dance commence, and we do not know our rounds! We must then
improvise,—all the world improvises its day. To-day, let us for once do
like all the world!—And therewith vanished my wonderful morning dream,
probably owing to the violent strokes of the tower-clock, which just
then announced the fifth hour with all the importance which is peculiar
to it. It seems to me that, on this occasion, the God of dreams wanted
to make merry over my habits,—it is my habit to commence the day by
arranging it properly, to make it endurable _for myself_, and it is
possible that I may often have done this too formally, and too much like
a prince.


                                  23.

_The Characteristics of Corruption._—Let us observe the following
characteristics in that condition of society from time to time
necessary, which is designated by the word "corruption." Immediately
upon the appearance of corruption anywhere, a motley _superstition_
gets the upper hand, and the hitherto universal belief of a people
becomes colourless and impotent in comparison with it; for
superstition is freethinking of the second rank,—he who gives himself
over to it selects certain forms and formulæ which appeal to him, and
permits himself a right of choice. The superstitious man is always
much more of a "person," in comparison with the religious man, and a
superstitious society will be one in which there are many individuals,
and a delight in individuality. Seen from this standpoint superstition
always appears as a _progress_ in comparison with belief, and as a
sign that the intellect becomes more independent and claims to have
its rights. Those who reverence the old religion and the religious
disposition then complain of corruption,—they have hitherto also
determined the usage of language, and have given a bad repute to
superstition, even among the freest spirits. Let us learn that it is a
symptom of _enlightenment_.—Secondly, a society in which corruption
takes a hold is blamed for _effeminacy_: for the appreciation of war,
and the delight in war perceptibly diminish in such a society, and the
conveniences of life are now just as eagerly sought after as were
military and gymnastic honours formerly. But one is accustomed to
overlook the fact that the old national energy and national passion,
which acquired a magnificent splendour in war and in the tourney, has
now transferred itself into innumerable private passions, and has
merely become less visible; indeed in periods of "corruption" the
quantity and quality of the expended energy of a people is probably
greater than ever, and the individual spends it lavishly, to such an
extent as could not be done formerly—he was not then rich enough to do
so! And thus it is precisely in times of "effeminacy" that tragedy
runs at large in and out of doors, it is then that ardent love and
ardent hatred are born, and the flame of knowledge flashes heavenward
in full blaze.—Thirdly, as if in amends for the reproach of
superstition and effeminacy, it is customary to say of such periods of
corruption that they are milder, and that cruelty has then greatly
diminished in comparison with the older, more credulous, and stronger
period. But to this praise I am just as little able to assent as to
that reproach: I only grant so much—namely, that cruelty now becomes
more refined, and its older forms are henceforth counter to the taste;
but the wounding and torturing by word and look reaches its highest
development in times of corruption,—it is now only that _wickedness_
is created, and the delight in wickedness. The men of the period of
corruption are witty and calumnious; they know that there are yet
other ways of murdering than by the dagger and the ambush—they know
also that all that is _well said_ is believed in.—Fourthly, it is when
"morals decay" that those beings whom one calls tyrants first make
their appearance; they are the forerunners of the _individual_, and as
it were early matured _firstlings_. Yet a little while, and this fruit
of fruits hangs ripe and yellow on the tree of a people,—and only for
the sake of such fruit did this tree exist! When the decay has reached
its worst, and likewise the conflict of all sorts of tyrants, there
always arises the Cæsar, the final tyrant, who puts an end to the
exhausted struggle for sovereignty, by making the exhaustedness work
for him. In his time the individual is usually most mature, and
consequently the "culture" is highest and most fruitful, but not on
his account nor through him: although the men of highest culture love
to flatter their Cæsar by pretending that they are _his_ creation. The
truth, however, is that they need quietness externally, because
internally they have disquietude and labour. In these times bribery
and treason are at their height: for the love of the _ego_, then first
discovered, is much more powerful than the love of the old, used-up,
hackneyed "fatherland"; and the need to be secure in one way or other
against the frightful fluctuations of fortune, opens even the nobler
hands, as soon as a richer and more powerful person shows himself
ready to put gold into them. There is then so little certainty with
regard to the future; people live only for the day: a condition of
mind which enables every deceiver to play an easy game,—people of
course only let themselves be misled and bribed "for the present," and
reserve for themselves futurity and virtue. The individuals, as is
well known, the men who only live for themselves, provide for the
moment more than do their opposites, the gregarious men, because they
consider themselves just as incalculable as the future; and similarly
they attach themselves willingly to despots, because they believe
themselves capable of activities and expedients, which can neither
reckon on being understood by the multitude, nor on finding favour
with them,—but the tyrant or the Cæsar understands the rights of the
Individual even in his excesses, and has an interest in speaking on
behalf of a bolder private morality, and even in giving his hand to
it. For he thinks of himself, and wishes people to think of him what
Napoleon once uttered in his classical style—"I have the right to
answer by an eternal 'thus I am' to everything about which complaint
is brought against me. I am apart from all the world, I accept
conditions from nobody. I wish people also to submit to my fancies,
and to take it quite as a simple matter, if I should indulge in this
or that diversion." Thus spoke Napoleon once to his wife, when she had
reasons for calling in question the fidelity of her husband.—The times
of corruption are the seasons when the apples fall from the tree: I
mean the individuals, the seed-bearers of the future, the pioneers of
the spiritual colonisation and of a new construction of national and
social unions. Corruption is only an abusive term for the _harvest
time_ of a people.


                                  24.

_Different Dissatisfactions._—The feeble and as it were feminine
dissatisfied people have ingenuity for beautifying and deepening life;
the strong dissatisfied people—the masculine persons among them, to
continue the metaphor—have the ingenuity for improving and safeguarding
life. The former show their weakness and feminine character by willingly
letting themselves be temporarily deceived, and perhaps even by putting
up with a little ecstasy and enthusiasm on a time, but on the whole they
are never to be satisfied, and suffer from the incurability of their
dissatisfaction; moreover they are the patrons of all those who manage
to concoct opiate and narcotic comforts, and just on that account averse
to those who value the physician higher than the priest,—they thereby
encourage the _continuance_ of actual distress! If there had not been a
surplus of dissatisfied persons of this kind in Europe since the time of
the Middle Ages, the remarkable capacity of Europeans for constant
_transformation_ would perhaps not have originated at all; for the
claims of the strong dissatisfied persons are too gross, and really too
modest to resist being finally quieted down. China is an instance of a
country in which dissatisfaction on a grand scale and the capacity for
transformation have died out for many centuries; and the Socialists and
state-idolaters of Europe could easily bring things to Chinese
conditions and to a Chinese "happiness," with their measures for the
amelioration and security of life, provided that they could first of all
root out the sicklier, tenderer, more feminine dissatisfaction and
Romanticism which are still very abundant among us. Europe is an invalid
who owes her best thanks to her incurability and the eternal
transformations of her sufferings; these constant new situations, these
equally constant new dangers, pains, and make-shifts, have at last
generated an intellectual sensitiveness which is almost equal to genius,
and is in any case the mother of all genius.


                                  25.

_Not Pre-ordained to Knowledge._—There is a purblind humility not at all
rare, and when a person is afflicted with it, he is once for all
unqualified for being a disciple of knowledge. It is this in fact: the
moment a man of this kind perceives anything striking, he turns as it
were on his heel, and says to himself: "You have deceived yourself!
Where have your wits been! This cannot be the truth!"—and then, instead
of looking at it and listening to it with more attention, he runs out of
the way of the striking object as if intimidated, and seeks to get it
out of his head as quickly as possible. For his fundamental rule runs
thus: "I want to see nothing that contradicts the usual opinion
concerning things! Am _I_ created for the purpose of discovering new
truths? There are already too many of the old ones."


                                  26.

_What is Living?_—Living—that is to continually eliminate from ourselves
what is about to die; Living—that is to be cruel and inexorable towards
all that becomes weak and old in ourselves, and not only in ourselves.
Living—that means, therefore, to be without piety toward the dying, the
wretched and the old? To be continually a murderer?—And yet old Moses
said: "Thou shalt not kill!"


                                  27.

_The Self-Renouncer._—What does the self-renouncer do? He strives after
a higher world, he wants to fly longer and further and higher than all
men of affirmation—he _throws away many things_ that would burden his
flight, and several things among them that are not valueless, that are
not unpleasant to him: he sacrifices them to his desire for elevation.
Now this sacrificing, this casting away, is the very thing which becomes
visible in him: on that account one calls him the self-renouncer, and as
such he stands before us, enveloped in his cowl, and as the soul of a
hair-shirt. With this effect, however, which he makes upon us he is well
content: he wants to keep concealed from us his desire, his pride, his
intention of flying _above_ us.—Yes! He is wiser than we thought, and so
courteous towards us—this affirmer! For that is what he is, like us,
even in his self-renunciation.


                                  28.

_Injuring with one's best Qualities._—Our strong points sometimes drive
us so far forward that we cannot any longer endure our weaknesses, and
we perish by them: we also perhaps see this result beforehand, but
nevertheless do not want it to be otherwise. We then become hard towards
that which would fain be spared in us, and our pitilessness is also our
greatness. Such an experience, which must in the end cost us our life,
is a symbol of the collective effect of great men upon others and upon
their epoch:—it is just with their best abilities, with that which only
_they_ can do, that they destroy much that is weak, uncertain, evolving,
and _willing_, and are thereby injurious. Indeed, the case may happen in
which, taken on the whole, they only do injury, because their best is
accepted and drunk up as it were solely by those who lose their
understanding and their egoism by it, as by too strong a beverage; they
become so intoxicated that they go breaking their limbs on all the wrong
roads where their drunkenness drives them.


                                  29.

_Adventitious Liars._—When people began to combat the unity of Aristotle
in France, and consequently also to defend it, there was once more to be
seen that which has been seen so often, but seen so unwillingly:—_people
imposed false reasons on themselves_ on account of which those laws
ought to exist, merely for the sake of not acknowledging to themselves
that they had _accustomed_ themselves to the authority of those laws,
and did not want any longer to have things otherwise. And people do so
in every prevailing morality and religion, and have always done so: the
reasons and intentions behind the habit, are only added surreptitiously
when people begin to combat the habit, and _ask_ for reasons and
intentions. It is here that the great dishonesty of the conservatives of
all times hides:—they are adventitious liars.


                                  30.

_The Comedy of Celebrated Men._—Celebrated men who _need_ their fame,
as, for instance, all politicians, no longer select their associates and
friends without after-thoughts: from the one they want a portion of the
splendour and reflection of his virtues; from the other they want the
fear-inspiring power of certain dubious qualities in him, of which
everybody is aware; from another they steal his reputation for idleness
and basking in the sun, because it is advantageous for their own ends to
be regarded temporarily as heedless and lazy:—it conceals the fact that
they lie in ambush; they now use the visionaries, now the experts, now
the brooders, now the pedants in their neighbourhood, as their actual
selves for the time, but very soon they do not need them any longer! And
thus while their environment and outside die off continually, everything
seems to crowd into this environment, and wants to become a "character"
of it; they are like great cities in this respect. Their repute is
continually in process of mutation, like their character, for their
changing methods require this change, and they show and _exhibit_
sometimes this and sometimes that actual or fictitious quality on the
stage; their friends and associates, as we have said, belong to these
stage properties. On the other hand, that which they aim at must remain
so much the more steadfast, and burnished and resplendent in the
distance,—and this also sometimes needs its comedy and its stage-play.


                                  31.

_Commerce and Nobility._—Buying and selling is now regarded as something
ordinary, like the art of reading and writing; everyone is now trained
to it even when he is not a tradesman, exercising himself daily in the
art; precisely as formerly in the period of uncivilised humanity,
everyone was a hunter and exercised himself day by day in the art of
hunting. Hunting was then something common: but just as this finally
became a privilege of the powerful and noble, and thereby lost the
character of the commonplace and the ordinary—by ceasing to be necessary
and by becoming an affair of fancy and luxury:—so it might become the
same some day with buying and selling. Conditions of society are
imaginable in which there will be no selling and buying, and in which
the necessity for this art will become quite lost; perhaps it may then
happen that individuals who are less subjected to the law of the
prevailing condition of things will indulge in buying and selling as a
_luxury of sentiment_. It is then only that commerce would acquire
nobility, and the noble would then perhaps occupy themselves just as
readily with commerce as they have done hitherto with war and politics:
while on the other hand the valuation of politics might then have
entirely altered. Already even politics ceases to be the business of a
gentleman; and it is possible that one day it may be found to be so
vulgar as to be brought, like all party literature and daily literature,
under the rubric: "Prostitution of the intellect."


                                  32.

_Undesirable Disciples._—What shall I do with these two youths! called
out a philosopher dejectedly, who "corrupted" youths, as Socrates had
once corrupted them,—they are unwelcome disciples to me. One of them
cannot say "Nay," and the other says "Half and half" to everything.
Provided they grasped my doctrine, the former would _suffer_ too much,
for my mode of thinking requires a martial soul, willingness to cause
pain, delight in denying, and a hard skin,—he would succumb by open
wounds and internal injuries. And the other will choose the mediocre in
everything he represents, and thus make a mediocrity of the whole,—I
should like my enemy to have such a disciple.


                                  33.

_Outside the Lecture-room._—"In order to prove that man after all
belongs to the good-natured animals, I would remind you how credulous he
has been for so long a time. It is now only, quite late, and after an
immense self-conquest, that he has become a _distrustful_ animal,—yes!
man is now more wicked than ever."—I do not understand this; why should
man now be more distrustful and more wicked?—"Because he now has
science,—because he needs to have it!"—


                                  34.

_Historia abscondita._—Every great man has a power which operates
backward; all history is again placed on the scales on his account, and
a thousand secrets of the past crawl out of their lurking-places—into
_his_ sunlight. There is absolutely no knowing what history may be some
day. The past is still perhaps undiscovered in its essence! There are
yet so many retroactive powers needed!


                                  35.

_Heresy and Witchcraft._—To think otherwise than is customary—that is by
no means so much the activity of a better intellect, as the activity of
strong, wicked inclinations,—severing, isolating, refractory,
mischief-loving, malicious inclinations. Heresy is the counterpart of
witchcraft, and is certainly just as little a merely harmless affair, or
a thing worthy of honour in itself. Heretics and sorcerers are two kinds
of bad men; they have it in common that they also feel themselves
wicked; their unconquerable delight is to attack and injure whatever
rules,—whether it be men or opinions. The Reformation, a kind of
duplication of the spirit of the Middle Ages at a time when it had no
longer a good conscience, produced both of these kinds of people in the
greatest profusion.


                                  36.

_Last Words._—It will be recollected that the Emperor Augustus, that
terrible man, who had himself as much in his own power, and who could be
silent as well as any wise Socrates, became indiscreet about himself in
his last words; for the first time he let his mask fall, when he gave to
understand that he had carried a mask and played a comedy,—he had played
the father of his country and wisdom on the throne well, even to the
point of illusion! _Plaudite amici, comoedia finita est!_—The thought of
the dying Nero: _qualis artifex pereo!_ was also the thought of the
dying Augustus: histrionic conceit! histrionic loquacity! And the very
counterpart to the dying Socrates!—But Tiberius died silently, that most
tortured of all self-torturers,—_he_ was _genuine_ and not a
stage-player! What may have passed through his head in the end! Perhaps
this: "Life—that is a long death. I am a fool, who shortened the lives
of so many! Was _I_ created for the purpose of being a benefactor? I
should have given them eternal life: and then I could have _seen them
dying_ eternally. I had such good eyes _for that_: _qualis spectator
pereo!_" When he seemed once more to regain his powers after a long
death-struggle, it was considered advisable to smother him with
pillows,—he died a double death.


                                  37.

_Owing to three Errors._—Science has been furthered during recent
centuries, partly because it was hoped that God's goodness and wisdom
would be best understood therewith and thereby—the principal motive in
the soul of great Englishmen (like Newton); partly because the absolute
utility of knowledge was believed in, and especially the most intimate
connection of morality, knowledge, and happiness—the principal motive in
the soul of great Frenchmen (like Voltaire); and partly because it was
thought that in science there was something unselfish, harmless,
self-sufficing, lovable, and truly innocent to be had, in which the evil
human impulses did not at all participate—the principal motive in the
soul of Spinoza, who felt himself divine, as a knowing being:—it is
consequently owing to three errors that science has been furthered.


                                  38.

_Explosive People._—When one considers how ready are the forces of young
men for discharge, one does not wonder at seeing them decide so
unfastidiously and with so little selection for this or that cause:
_that_ which attracts them is the sight of eagerness about any cause, as
it were the sight of the burning match—not the cause itself. The more
ingenious seducers on that account operate by holding out the prospect
of an explosion to such persons, and do not urge their cause by means of
reasons; these powder-barrels are not won over by means of reasons!


                                  39.

_Altered Taste._—The alteration of the general taste is more important
than the alteration of opinions; opinions, with all their proving,
refuting, and intellectual masquerade, are merely symptoms of altered
taste, and are certainly _not_ what they are still so often claimed to
be, the causes of the altered taste. How does the general taste alter?
By the fact of individuals, the powerful and influential persons,
expressing and tyrannically enforcing without any feeling of shame,
_their_ _hoc est ridiculum, hoc est absurdum_; the decisions, therefore,
of their taste and their disrelish:—they thereby lay a constraint upon
many people, out of which there gradually grows a habituation for still
more, and finally a _necessity for all_. The fact, however, that these
individuals feel and "taste" differently, has usually its origin in a
peculiarity of their mode of life, nourishment, or digestion, perhaps in
a surplus or deficiency of the inorganic salts in their blood and brain,
in short in their _physis_; they have, however, the courage to avow
their physical constitution, and to lend an ear even to the most
delicate tones of its requirements: their æsthetic and moral judgments
are those "most delicate tones" of their _physis_.


                                  40.

_The Lack of a noble Presence._—Soldiers and their leaders have always a
much higher mode of comportment toward one another than workmen and
their employers. At present at least, all militarily established
civilisation still stands high above all so-called industrial
civilisation; the latter, in its present form, is in general the meanest
mode of existence that has ever been. It is simply the law of necessity
that operates here: people want to live, and have to sell themselves;
but they despise him who exploits their necessity, and _purchases_ the
workman. It is curious that the subjection to powerful, fear-inspiring,
and even dreadful individuals, to tyrants and leaders of armies, is not
at all felt so painfully as the subjection to such undistinguished and
uninteresting persons as the captains of industry; in the employer the
workman usually sees merely a crafty, blood-sucking dog of a man,
speculating on every necessity, whose name, form, character, and
reputation are altogether indifferent to him. It is probable that the
manufacturers and great magnates of commerce have hitherto lacked too
much all those forms and attributes of a _superior race_, which alone
make persons interesting; if they had had the nobility of the nobly-born
in their looks and bearing, there would perhaps have been no socialism
in the masses of the people. For these are really ready for _slavery_ of
every kind, provided that the superior class above them constantly shows
itself legitimately superior, and _born_ to command—by its noble
presence! The commonest man feels that nobility is not to be improvised,
and that it is his part to honour it as the fruit of protracted
race-culture,—but the absence of superior presence, and the notorious
vulgarity of manufacturers with red, fat hands, brings up the thought to
him that it is only chance and fortune that has here elevated the one
above the other; well then—so he reasons with himself—let _us_ in our
turn tempt chance and fortune! Let us in our turn throw the dice!—and
socialism commences.


                                  41.

_Against Remorse._—The thinker sees in his own actions attempts and
questionings to obtain information about something or other; success and
failure are _answers_ to him first and foremost. To vex himself,
however, because something does not succeed, or to feel remorse at
all—he leaves that to those who act because they are commanded to do so,
and expect to get a beating when their gracious master is not satisfied
with the result.


                                  42.

_Work and Ennui._—In respect to seeking work for the sake of the pay,
almost all men are alike at present in civilised countries; to all of
them work is a means, and not itself the end; on which account they are
not very select in the choice of the work, provided it yields an
abundant profit. But still there are rarer men who would rather perish
than work without _delight_ in their labour: the fastidious people,
difficult to satisfy, whose object is not served by an abundant profit,
unless the work itself be the reward of all rewards. Artists and
contemplative men of all kinds belong to this rare species of human
beings; and also the idlers who spend their life in hunting and
travelling, or in love affairs and adventures. They all seek toil and
trouble in so far as these are associated with pleasure, and they want
the severest and hardest labour, if it be necessary. In other respects,
however, they have a resolute indolence, even should impoverishment,
dishonour, and danger to health and life be associated therewith. They
are not so much afraid of ennui as of labour without pleasure; indeed
they require much ennui, if _their_ work is to succeed with them. For
the thinker and for all inventive spirits ennui is the unpleasant "calm"
of the soul which precedes the happy voyage and the dancing breezes; he
must endure it, he must _await_ the effect it has on him:—it is
precisely _this_ which lesser natures cannot at all experience! It is
common to scare away ennui in every way, just as it is common to labour
without pleasure. It perhaps distinguishes the Asiatics above the
Europeans, that they are capable of a longer and profounder repose; even
their narcotics operate slowly and require patience, in contrast to the
obnoxious suddenness of the European poison, alcohol.


                                  43.

_What the Laws Betray._—One makes a great mistake when one studies the
penal laws of a people, as if they were an expression of its character;
the laws do not betray what a people is, but what appears to them
foreign, strange, monstrous, and outlandish. The laws concern themselves
with the exceptions to the morality of custom; and the severest
punishments fall on acts which conform to the customs of the
neighbouring peoples. Thus among the Wahabites, there are only two
mortal sins: having another God than the Wahabite God, and—smoking (it
is designated by them as "the disgraceful kind of drinking"). "And how
is it with regard to murder and adultery?"—asked the Englishman with
astonishment on learning these things. "Well, God is gracious and
pitiful!" answered the old chief.—Thus among the ancient Romans there
was the idea that a woman could only sin mortally in two ways: by
adultery on the one hand, and—by wine-drinking on the other. Old Cato
pretended that kissing among relatives had only been made a custom in
order to keep women in control on this point; a kiss meant: did her
breath smell of wine? Wives had actually been punished by death who were
surprised taking wine: and certainly not merely because women under the
influence of wine sometimes unlearn altogether the art of saying No; the
Romans were afraid above all things of the orgiastic and Dionysian
spirit with which the women of Southern Europe at that time (when wine
was still new in Europe) were sometimes visited, as by a monstrous
foreignness which subverted the basis of Roman sentiments; it seemed to
them treason against Rome, as the embodiment of foreignness.


                                  44.

_The Believed Motive._—However important it may be to know the motives
according to which mankind has really acted hitherto, perhaps the
_belief_ in this or that motive, and therefore that which mankind has
assumed and imagined to be the actual mainspring of its activity
hitherto, is something still more essential for the thinker to know. For
the internal happiness and misery of men have always come to them
through their belief in this or that motive,—_not_ however, through that
which was actually the motive! All about the latter has an interest of
secondary rank.


                                  45.

_Epicurus._—Yes, I am proud of perceiving the character of Epicurus
differently from anyone else perhaps, and of enjoying the happiness of
the afternoon of antiquity in all that I hear and read of him:—I see his
eye gazing out on a broad whitish sea, over the shore-rocks on which the
sunshine rests, while great and small creatures play in its light,
secure and calm like this light and that eye itself. Such happiness
could only have been devised by a chronic sufferer, the happiness of an
eye before which the sea of existence has become calm, and which can no
longer tire of gazing at the surface and at the variegated, tender,
tremulous skin of this sea. Never previously was there such a moderation
of voluptuousness.


                                  46.

_Our Astonishment._—There is a profound and fundamental satisfaction in
the fact that science ascertains things that _hold their ground_, and
again furnish the basis for new researches:—it could certainly be
otherwise. Indeed, we are so much convinced of all the uncertainty and
caprice of our judgments, and of the everlasting change of all human
laws and conceptions, that we are really astonished _how persistently_
the results of science hold their ground! In earlier times people knew
nothing of this changeability of all human things; the custom of
morality maintained the belief that the whole inner life of man was
bound to iron necessity by eternal fetters:—perhaps people then felt a
similar voluptuousness of astonishment when they listened to tales and
fairy stories. The wonderful did so much good to those men, who might
well get tired sometimes of the regular and the eternal. To leave the
ground for once! To soar! To stray! To be mad!—that belonged to the
paradise and the revelry of earlier times; while our felicity is like
that of the shipwrecked man who has gone ashore, and places himself with
both feet on the old, firm ground—in astonishment that it does not rock.


                                  47.

_The Suppression of the Passions._—When one continually prohibits the
expression of the passions as something to be left to the "vulgar," to
coarser, bourgeois, and peasant natures—that is, when one does not want
to suppress the passions themselves, but only their language and
demeanour, one nevertheless realises _therewith_ just what one does not
want: the suppression of the passions themselves, or at least their
weakening and alteration,—as the court of Louis XIV. (to cite the most
instructive instance), and all that was dependent on it, experienced.
The generation _that followed_, trained in suppressing their expression,
no longer possessed the passions themselves, but had a pleasant,
superficial, playful disposition in their place,—a generation which was
so permeated with the incapacity to be ill-mannered, that even an injury
was not taken and retaliated, except with courteous words. Perhaps our
own time furnishes the most remarkable counterpart to this period: I see
everywhere (in life, in the theatre, and not least in all that is
written) satisfaction at all the _coarser_ outbursts and gestures of
passion; a certain convention of passionateness is now desired,—only not
the passion itself! Nevertheless _it_ will thereby be at last reached,
and our posterity will have a _genuine savagery_, and not merely a
formal savagery and unmannerliness.


                                  48.

_Knowledge of Distress._—Perhaps there is nothing by which men and
periods are so much separated from one another, as by the different
degrees of knowledge of distress which they possess; distress of the
soul as well as of the body. With respect to the latter, owing to lack
of sufficient self-experience, we men of the present day (in spite of
our deficiencies and infirmities), are perhaps all of us blunderers and
visionaries in comparison with the men of the age of fear—the longest of
all ages,—when the individual had to protect himself against violence,
and for that purpose had to be a man of violence himself. At that time a
man went through a long schooling of corporeal tortures and privations,
and found even in a certain kind of cruelty toward himself, in a
voluntary use of pain, a necessary means for his preservation; at that
time a person trained his environment to the endurance of pain; at that
time a person willingly inflicted pain, and saw the most frightful
things of this kind happen to others, without having any other feeling
than for his own security. As regards the distress of the soul, however,
I now look at every man with respect to whether he knows it by
experience or by description; whether he still regards it as necessary
to simulate this knowledge, perhaps as an indication of more refined
culture; or whether, at the bottom of his heart, he does not at all
believe in great sorrows of soul, and at the naming of them has in his
mind a similar experience as at the naming of great corporeal
sufferings, such as tooth-aches, and stomach-aches. It is thus, however,
that it seems to be with most people at present. Owing to the universal
inexperience of both kinds of pain, and the comparative rarity of the
spectacle of a sufferer, an important consequence results: people now
hate pain far more than earlier man did, and calumniate it worse than
ever; indeed people nowadays can hardly endure the _thought_ of pain,
and make out of it an affair of conscience and a reproach to collective
existence. The appearance of pessimistic philosophies is not at all the
sign of great and dreadful miseries; for these interrogative marks
regarding the worth of life appear in periods when the refinement and
alleviation of existence already deem the unavoidable gnat-stings of the
soul and body as altogether too bloody and wicked; and in the poverty of
actual experiences of pain, would now like to make _painful general
ideas_ appear as suffering of the worst kind.—There might indeed be a
remedy for pessimistic philosophies and the excessive sensibility which
seems to me the real "distress of the present":—but perhaps this remedy
already sounds too cruel, and would itself be reckoned among the
symptoms owing to which people at present conclude that "existence is
something evil." Well! the remedy for "the distress" is _distress_.


                                  49.

_Magnanimity and allied Qualities._—Those paradoxical phenomena, such as
the sudden coldness in the demeanour of good-natured men, the humour of
the melancholy, and above all _magnanimity_, as a sudden renunciation of
revenge or of the gratification of envy—appear in men in whom there is a
powerful inner impulsiveness, in men of sudden satiety and sudden
disgust. Their satisfactions are so rapid and violent that satiety,
aversion, and flight into the antithetical taste, immediately follow
upon them: in this contrast the convulsion of feeling liberates itself,
in one person by sudden coldness, in another by laughter, and in a third
by tears and self-sacrifice. The magnanimous person appears to me—at
least that kind of magnanimous person who has always made most
impression—as a man with the strongest thirst for vengeance, to whom a
gratification presents itself close at hand, and who _already_ drinks it
off _in imagination_ so copiously, thoroughly, and to the last drop,
that an excessive, rapid disgust follows this rapid licentiousness;—he
now elevates himself "above himself," as one says, and forgives his
enemy, yea, blesses and honours him. With this violence done to himself,
however, with this mockery of his impulse to revenge, even still so
powerful, he merely yields to the new impulse, the disgust which has
become powerful, and does this just as impatiently and licentiously, as
a short time previously he _forestalled_, and as it were exhausted, the
joy of revenge with his fantasy. In magnanimity there is the same amount
of egoism as in revenge, but a different quality of egoism.


                                  50.

_The Argument of Isolation._—The reproach of conscience, even in the
most conscientious, is weak against the feeling: "This and that are
contrary to the good morals of _your_ society." A cold glance or a wry
mouth, on the part of those among whom and for whom one has been
educated, is still _feared_ even by the strongest. What is really feared
there? Isolation! as the argument which demolishes even the best
arguments for a person or cause!—It is thus that the gregarious instinct
speaks in us.


                                  51.

_Sense for Truth._—Commend me to all scepticism where I am permitted to
answer: "Let us put it to the test!" But I don't wish to hear anything
more of things and questions which do not admit of being tested. That is
the limit of my "sense for truth": for bravery has there lost its right.


                                  52.

_What others Know of us._—That which we know of ourselves and have in
our memory is not so decisive for the happiness of our life as is
generally believed. One day it flashes upon our mind what _others_ know
of us (or think they know)—and then we acknowledge that it is the more
powerful. We get on with our bad conscience more easily than with our
bad reputation.


                                  53.

_Where Goodness Begins._—Where bad eyesight can no longer see the evil
impulse as such, on account of its refinement,—there man sets up the
kingdom of goodness; and the feeling of having now gone over into the
kingdom of goodness brings all those impulses (such as the feelings of
security, of comfortableness, of benevolence) into simultaneous
activity, which were threatened and confined by the evil impulses.
Consequently, the duller the eye so much the further does goodness
extend! Hence the eternal cheerfulness of the populace and of children!
Hence the gloominess and grief (allied to the bad conscience) of great
thinkers.


                                  54.

_The Consciousness of Appearance._—How wonderfully and novelly, and at
the same time how awfully and ironically, do I feel myself situated with
respect to collective existence, with my knowledge! I have _discovered_
for myself that the old humanity and animality, yea, the collective
primeval age, and the past of all sentient being, continues to meditate,
love, hate, and reason in me,—I have suddenly awoke in the midst of this
dream, but merely to the consciousness that I just dream, and that I
_must_ dream on in order not to perish; just as the sleep-walker must
dream on in order not to tumble down. What is it that is now
"appearance" to me! Verily, not the antithesis of any kind of
essence,—what knowledge can I assert of any kind of essence whatsoever,
except merely the predicates of its appearance! Verily not a dead mask
which one could put upon an unknown X, and which to be sure one could
also remove! Appearance is for me the operating and living thing itself;
which goes so far in its self-mockery as to make me feel that here there
is appearance, and Will o' the Wisp, and spirit-dance, and nothing
more,—that among all these dreamers, I also, the "thinker," dance my
dance, that the thinker is a means of prolonging further the terrestrial
dance, and in so far is one of the masters of ceremony of existence, and
that the sublime consistency and connectedness of all branches of
knowledge is perhaps, and will perhaps, be the best means for
_maintaining_ the universality of the dreaming, the complete, mutual
understandability of all those dreamers, and thereby _the duration of
the dream_.


                                  55.

_The Ultimate Nobility of Character._—What then makes a person "noble"?
Certainly not that he makes sacrifices; even the frantic libertine makes
sacrifices. Certainly not that he generally follows his passions; there
are contemptible passions. Certainly not that he does something for
others and without selfishness; perhaps the effect of selfishness is
precisely at its greatest in the noblest persons.—But that the passion
which seizes the noble man is a peculiarity, without his knowing that it
is so: the use of a rare and singular measuring-rod, almost a frenzy:
the feeling of heat in things which feel cold to all other persons: a
divining of values for which scales have not yet been invented: a
sacrificing on altars which are consecrated to an unknown God: a bravery
without the desire for honour: a self-sufficiency which has
superabundance, and imparts to men and things. Hitherto, therefore, it
has been the rare in man, and the unconsciousness of this rareness, that
has made men noble. Here, however, let us consider that everything
ordinary, immediate, and indispensable, in short, what has been most
preservative of the species, and generally the _rule_ in mankind
hitherto, has been judged unreasonable and calumniated in its entirety
by this standard, in favour of the exceptions. To become the advocate of
the rule—that may perhaps be the ultimate form and refinement in which
nobility of character will reveal itself on earth.


                                  56.

_The Desire for Suffering._—When I think of the desire to do something,
how it continually tickles and stimulates millions of young Europeans,
who cannot endure themselves and all their ennui,—I conceive that there
must be a desire in them to suffer something, in order to derive from
their suffering a worthy motive for acting, for doing something.
Distress is necessary! Hence the cry of the politicians, hence the many
false, trumped-up, exaggerated "states of distress" of all possible
kinds, and the blind readiness to believe in them. This young world
desires that there should arrive or appear _from the outside_—not
happiness—but misfortune; and their imagination is already busy
beforehand to form a monster out of it, so that they may afterwards be
able to fight with a monster. If these distress-seekers felt the power
to benefit themselves, to do something for themselves from internal
sources, they would also understand how to create a distress of their
own, specially their own, from internal sources. Their inventions might
then be more refined, and their gratifications might sound like good
music: while at present they fill the world with their cries of
distress, and consequently too often with the _feeling of distress_ in
the first place! They do not know what to make of themselves—and so they
paint the misfortune of others on the wall; they always need others! And
always again other others!—Pardon me, my friends, I have ventured to
paint my _happiness_ on the wall.

-----

Footnote 7:

  Allusions to the song of Clara in Goethe's "Egmont."—TR.




                              BOOK SECOND


                                  57.

_To the Realists._—Ye sober beings, who feel yourselves armed against
passion and fantasy, and would gladly make a pride and an ornament out
of your emptiness, ye call yourselves realists and give to understand
that the world is actually constituted as it appears to you; before you
alone reality stands unveiled, and ye yourselves would perhaps be the
best part of it,—oh, ye dear images of Sais! But are not ye also in your
unveiled condition still extremely passionate and dusky beings compared
with the fish, and still all too like an enamoured artist?[8]—and what
is "reality" to an enamoured artist! Ye still carry about with you the
valuations of things which had their origin in the passions and
infatuations of earlier centuries! There is still a secret and
ineffaceable drunkenness embodied in your sobriety! Your love of
"reality," for example—oh, that is an old, primitive "love"! In every
feeling, in every sense-impression, there is a portion of this old love:
and similarly also some kind of fantasy, prejudice, irrationality,
ignorance, fear, and whatever else has become mingled and woven into it.
There is that mountain! There is that cloud! What is "real" in them?
Remove the phantasm and the whole human _element_ therefrom, ye sober
ones! Yes, if ye could do _that_! If ye could forget your origin, your
past, your preparatory schooling,—your whole history as man and beast!
There is no "reality" for us—nor for you either, ye sober ones,—we are
far from being so alien to one another as ye suppose, and perhaps our
good-will to get beyond drunkenness is just as respectable as your
belief that ye are altogether _incapable_ of drunkenness.


                                  58.

_Only as Creators!_—It has caused me the greatest trouble, and for ever
causes me the greatest trouble, to perceive that unspeakably more
depends upon _what things are called_, than on what they are. The
reputation, the name and appearance, the importance, the usual measure
and weight of things—each being in origin most frequently an error and
arbitrariness thrown over the things like a garment, and quite alien to
their essence and even to their exterior—have gradually, by the belief
therein and its continuous growth from generation to generation, grown
as it were on-and-into things and become their very body; the appearance
at the very beginning becomes almost always the essence in the end, and
_operates_ as the essence! What a fool he would be who would think it
enough to refer here to this origin and this nebulous veil of illusion,
in order to _annihilate_ that which virtually passes for the
world—namely, so-called "reality"! It is only as creators that we can
annihilate!—But let us not forget this: it suffices to create new names
and valuations and probabilities, in order in the long run to create new
"things."


                                  59.

_We Artists!_—When we love a woman we have readily a hatred against
nature, on recollecting all the disagreeable natural functions to which
every woman is subject; we prefer not to think of them at all, but if
once our soul touches on these things it twitches impatiently, and
glances, as we have said, contemptuously at nature:—we are hurt; nature
seems to encroach upon our possessions, and with the profanest hands. We
then shut our ears against all physiology, and we decree in secret that
"we will hear nothing of the fact that man is something else than _soul
and form_!" "The man under the skin" is an abomination and monstrosity,
a blasphemy of God and of love to all lovers.—Well, just as the lover
still feels with respect to nature and natural functions, so did every
worshipper of God and his "holy omnipotence" formerly feel: in all that
was said of nature by astronomers, geologists, physiologists, and
physicians, he saw an encroachment on his most precious possession, and
consequently an attack,—and moreover also an impertinence of the
assailant! The "law of nature" sounded to him as blasphemy against God;
in truth he would too willingly have seen the whole of mechanics traced
back to moral acts of volition and arbitrariness:—but because nobody
could render him this service, he _concealed_ nature and mechanism from
himself as best he could, and lived in a dream. Oh, those men of former
times understood how to _dream_, and did not need first to go to
sleep!—and we men of the present day also still understand it too well,
with all our good-will for wakefulness and daylight! It suffices to
love, to hate, to desire, and in general to feel,—_immediately_ the
spirit and the power of the dream come over us, and we ascend, with open
eyes and indifferent to all danger, the most dangerous paths, to the
roofs and towers of fantasy, and without any giddiness, as persons born
for climbing—we the night-walkers by day! We artists! We concealers of
naturalness! We moon-struck and God-struck ones! We dead-silent,
untiring wanderers on heights which we do not see as heights, but as our
plains, as our places of safety!


                                  60.

_Women and their Effect in the Distance._—Have I still ears? Am I only
ear, and nothing else besides? Here I stand in the midst of the surging
of the breakers, whose white flames fork up to my feet;—from all sides
there is howling, threatening, crying, and screaming at me, while in the
lowest depths the old earth-shaker sings his aria, hollow like a roaring
bull; he beats such an earth-shaker's measure thereto, that even the
hearts of these weathered rock-monsters tremble at the sound. Then,
suddenly, as if born out of nothingness, there appears before the portal
of this hellish labyrinth, only a few fathoms distant,—a great
sailing-ship gliding silently along like a ghost. Oh, this ghostly
beauty! With what enchantment it seizes me! What? Has all the repose and
silence in the world embarked here? Does my happiness itself sit in this
quiet place, my happier ego, my second immortalised self? Still not
dead, yet also no longer living? As a ghost-like, calm, gazing, gliding,
sweeping, neutral being? Similar to the ship, which, with its white
sails, like an immense butterfly, passes over the dark sea! Yes! Passing
_over_ existence! That is it! That would be it!——It seems that the noise
here has made me a visionary? All great noise causes one to place
happiness in the calm and the distance. When a man is in the midst of
_his_ hubbub, in the midst of the breakers of his plots and plans, he
there sees perhaps calm, enchanting beings glide past him, for whose
happiness and retirement he longs—_they are women_. He almost thinks
that there with the women dwells his better self; that in these calm
places even the loudest breakers become still as death, and life itself
a dream of life. But still! But still! My noble enthusiast, there is
also in the most beautiful sailing-ship so much noise and bustling, and
alas, so much petty, pitiable bustling! The enchantment and the most
powerful effect of women is, to use the language of philosophers, an
effect at a distance, an _actio in distans_; there belongs thereto,
however, primarily and above all,—_distance_!


                                  61.

_In Honour of Friendship._—That the sentiment of friendship was regarded
by antiquity as the highest sentiment, higher even than the most vaunted
pride of the self-sufficient and wise, yea as it were its sole and still
holier brotherhood, is very well expressed by the story of the
Macedonian king who made the present of a talent to a cynical Athenian
philosopher from whom he received it back again. "What?" said the king,
"has he then no friend?" He therewith meant to say, "I honour this pride
of the wise and independent man, but I should have honoured his humanity
still higher if the friend in him had gained the victory over his pride.
The philosopher has lowered himself in my estimation, for he showed that
he did not know one of the two highest sentiments—and in fact the higher
of them!"


                                  62.

_Love._—Love pardons even the passion of the beloved.


                                  63.

_Woman in Music._—How does it happen that warm and rainy winds bring the
musical mood and the inventive delight in melody with them? Are they not
the same winds that fill the churches and give women amorous thoughts?


                                  64.

_Sceptics._—I fear women who have become old are more sceptical in the
secret recesses of their hearts than any of the men are; they believe in
the superficiality of existence as in its essence, and all virtue and
profundity is to them only the disguising of this "truth," the very
desirable disguising of a _pudendum_,—an affair, therefore, of decency
and of modesty, and nothing more!


                                  65.

_Devotedness._—There are noble women with a certain poverty of spirit,
who, in order to _express_ their profoundest devotedness, have no other
alternative but to offer their virtue and modesty: it is the highest
thing they have. And this present is often accepted without putting the
recipient under such deep obligation as the giver supposed,—a very
melancholy story!


                                  66.

_The Strength of the Weak._—Women are all skilful in exaggerating their
weaknesses, indeed they are inventive in weaknesses, so as to seem quite
fragile ornaments to which even a grain of dust does harm; their
existence is meant to bring home to man's mind his coarseness, and to
appeal to his conscience. They thus defend themselves against the strong
and all "rights of might."


                                  67.

_Self-dissembling._—She loves him now and has since been looking forth
with as quiet confidence as a cow; but alas! It was precisely his
delight that she seemed so fitful and absolutely incomprehensible! He
had rather too much steady weather in himself already! Would she not do
well to feign her old character? to feign indifference? Does not—love
itself advise her _to do so_? _Vivat comœdia!_


                                  68.

_Will and Willingness._—Some one brought a youth to a wise man and said,
"See, this is one who is being corrupted by women!" The wise man shook
his head and smiled. "It is men," he called out, "who corrupt women; and
everything that women lack should be atoned for and improved in men,—for
man creates for himself the ideal of woman, and woman moulds herself
according to this ideal."—"You are too tender-hearted towards women,"
said one of the bystanders, "you do not know them!" The wise man
answered: "Man's attribute is will, woman's attribute is
willingness,—such is the law of the sexes, verily! a hard law for woman!
All human beings are innocent of their existence, women, however, are
doubly innocent; who could have enough of salve and gentleness for
them!"—"What about salve! What about gentleness!" called out another
person in the crowd, "we must educate women better!"—"We must educate
men better," said the wise man, and made a sign to the youth to follow
him.—The youth, however, did not follow him.


                                  69.

_Capacity for Revenge._—That a person cannot and consequently will not
defend himself, does not yet cast disgrace upon him in our eyes; but we
despise the person who has neither the ability nor the good-will for
revenge—whether it be a man or a woman. Would a woman be able to
captivate us (or, as people say, to "fetter" us) whom we did not credit
with knowing how to employ the dagger (any kind of dagger) skilfully
_against us_ under certain circumstances? Or against herself; which in a
certain case might be the severest revenge (the Chinese revenge).


                                  70.

_The Mistresses of the Masters._—A powerful contralto voice, as we
occasionally hear it in the theatre, raises suddenly for us the curtain
on possibilities in which we usually do not believe; all at once we are
convinced that somewhere in the world there may be women with high,
heroic, royal souls, capable and prepared for magnificent remonstrances,
resolutions, and self-sacrifices, capable and prepared for domination
over men, because in them the best in man, superior to sex, has become a
corporeal ideal. To be sure, it is not the intention of the theatre that
such voices should give such a conception of women; they are usually
intended to represent the ideal male lover, for example, a Romeo; but,
to judge by my experience, the theatre regularly miscalculates here, and
the musician also, who expects such effects from such a voice. People do
not believe in _these_ lovers; these voices still contain a tinge of the
motherly and housewifely character, and most of all when love is in
their tone.


                                  71.

_On Female Chastity._—There is something quite astonishing and
extraordinary in the education of women of the higher class; indeed,
there is perhaps nothing more paradoxical. All the world is agreed to
educate them with as much ignorance as possible _in eroticis_, and to
inspire their soul with a profound shame of such things, and the
extremest impatience and horror at the suggestion of them. It is really
here only that all the "honour" of woman is at stake; what would one not
forgive them in other respects! But here they are intended to remain
ignorant to the very backbone:—they are intended to have neither eyes,
ears, words, nor thoughts for this, their "wickedness"; indeed knowledge
here is already evil. And then! To be hurled as with an awful
thunderbolt into reality and knowledge with marriage—and indeed by him
whom they most love and esteem: to have to encounter love and shame in
contradiction, yea, to have to feel rapture, abandonment, duty,
sympathy, and fright at the unexpected proximity of God and animal, and
whatever else besides! all at once!—There, in fact, a psychic
entanglement has been effected which is quite unequalled! Even the
sympathetic curiosity of the wisest discerner of men does not suffice to
divine how this or that woman gets along with the solution of this
enigma and the enigma of this solution; what dreadful, far-reaching
suspicions must awaken thereby in the poor unhinged soul; and forsooth,
how the ultimate philosophy and scepticism of the woman casts anchor at
this point!—Afterwards the same profound silence as before: and often
even a silence to herself, a shutting of her eyes to herself.—Young
wives on that account make great efforts to appear superficial and
thoughtless; the most ingenious of them simulate a kind of
impudence.—Wives easily feel their husbands as a question-mark to their
honour, and their children as an apology or atonement,—they require
children, and wish for them in quite another spirit than a husband
wishes for them.—In short, one cannot be gentle enough towards women!


                                  72.

_Mothers._—Animals think differently from men with respect to females;
with them the female is regarded as the productive being. There is no
paternal love among them, but there is such a thing as love of the
children of a beloved, and habituation to them. In the young, the
females find gratification for their lust of dominion; the young are a
property, an occupation, something quite comprehensible to them, with
which they can chatter: all this conjointly is maternal love,—it is to
be compared to the love of the artist for his work. Pregnancy has made
the females gentler, more expectant, more timid, more submissively
inclined; and similarly intellectual pregnancy engenders the character
of the contemplative, who are allied to women in character:—they are the
masculine mothers.—Among animals the masculine sex is regarded as the
beautiful sex.


                                  73.

_Saintly Cruelty._—A man holding a newly born child in his hands came to
a saint. "What should I do with the child," he asked, "it is wretched,
deformed, and has not even enough of life to die." "Kill it," cried the
saint with a dreadful voice, "kill it, and then hold it in thy arms for
three days and three nights to brand it on thy memory:—thus wilt thou
never again beget a child when it is not the time for thee to
beget."—When the man had heard this he went away disappointed; and many
found fault with the saint because he had advised cruelty, for he had
advised to kill the child. "But is it not more cruel to let it live?"
asked the saint.


                                  74.

_The Unsuccessful._—Those poor women always fail of success who become
agitated and uncertain, and talk too much in presence of him whom they
love; for men are most successfully seduced by a certain subtle and
phlegmatic tenderness.


                                  75.

_The Third Sex._—"A small man is a paradox, but still a man,—but the
small woman seems to me to be of another sex in comparison with
well-grown ones"—said an old dancing-master. A small woman is never
beautiful—said old Aristotle.


                                  76.

_The greatest Danger._—Had there not at all times been a larger number
of men who regarded the cultivation of their mind—their "rationality"—as
their pride, their obligation, their virtue, and were injured or shamed
by all play of fancy and extravagance of thinking—as lovers of "sound
common sense":—mankind would long ago have perished! Incipient
_insanity_ has hovered, and hovers continually over mankind as its
greatest danger: that is precisely the breaking out of inclination in
feeling, seeing, and hearing; the enjoyment of the unruliness of the
mind; the delight in human unreason. It is not truth and certainty that
is the antithesis of the world of the insane, but the universality and
all-obligatoriness of a belief, in short, non-voluntariness in forming
opinions. And the greatest labour of human beings hitherto has been to
agree with one another regarding a great many things, and to impose upon
themselves a _law of agreement_—indifferent whether these things are
true or false. This is the discipline of the mind which has preserved
mankind;—but the counter-impulses are still so powerful that one can
really speak of the future of mankind with little confidence. The ideas
of things still continually shift and move, and will perhaps alter more
than ever in the future; it is continually the most select spirits
themselves who strive against universal obligatoriness—the investigators
of _truth_ above all! The accepted belief, as the belief of all the
world, continually engenders a disgust and a new longing in the more
ingenious minds; and already the slow _tempo_ which it demands for all
intellectual processes (the imitation of the tortoise, which is here
recognised as the rule) makes the artists and poets runaways:—it is in
these impatient spirits that a downright delight in delirium breaks out,
because delirium has such a joyful _tempo_! Virtuous intellects,
therefore, are needed—ah! I want to use the least ambiguous
word,—_virtuous stupidity_ is needed, imperturbable conductors of the
_slow_ spirits are needed, in order that the faithful of the great
collective belief may remain with one another and dance their dance
further: it is a necessity of the first importance that here enjoins and
demands. _We others are the exceptions and the danger_,—we eternally
need protection!—Well, there can actually be something said in favour of
the exceptions _provided that they never want to become the rule_.


                                  77.

_The Animal with good Conscience._—It is not unknown to me that there is
vulgarity in everything that pleases Southern Europe—whether it be
Italian opera (for example, Rossini's and Bellini's), or the Spanish
adventure-romance (most readily accessible to us in the French garb of
Gil Blas)—but it does not offend me, any more than the vulgarity which
one encounters in a walk through Pompeii, or even in the reading of
every ancient book: what is the reason of this? Is it because shame is
lacking here, and because the vulgar always comes forward just as sure
and certain of itself as anything noble, lovely, and passionate in the
same kind of music or romance? "The animal has its rights like man, so
let it run about freely; and you, my dear fellow-man, are still this
animal, in spite of all!"—that seems to me the moral of the case, and
the peculiarity of southern humanity. Bad taste has its rights like good
taste, and even a prerogative over the latter when it is the great
requisite, the sure satisfaction, and as it were a universal language,
an immediately intelligible mask and attitude; the excellent, select
taste on the other hand has always something of a seeking, tentative
character, not fully certain that it understands,—it is never, and has
never been popular! The _masque_ is and remains popular! So let all this
masquerade run along in the melodies and cadences, in the leaps and
merriment of the rhythm of these operas! Quite the ancient life! What
does one understand of it, if one does not understand the delight in the
masque, the good conscience of all masquerade! Here is the bath and the
refreshment of the ancient spirit:—and perhaps this bath was still more
necessary for the rare and sublime natures of the ancient world than for
the vulgar.—On the other hand, a vulgar turn in northern works, for
example in German music, offends me unutterably. There is _shame_ in it,
the artist has lowered himself in his own sight, and could not even
avoid blushing: we are ashamed with him, and are so hurt because we
surmise that he believed he had to lower himself on our account.


                                  78.

_What we should be Grateful for._—It is only the artists, and especially
the theatrical artists who have furnished men with eyes and ears to hear
and see with some pleasure what everyone is in himself, what he
experiences and aims at: it is only _they_ who have taught us how to
estimate the hero that is concealed in each of these common-place men,
and the art of looking at ourselves from a distance as heroes, and as it
were simplified and transfigured,—the art of "putting ourselves on the
stage" before ourselves. It is thus only that we get beyond some of the
paltry details in ourselves! Without that art we should be nothing but
fore-ground, and would live absolutely under the spell of the
perspective which makes the closest and the commonest seem immensely
large and like reality in itself.—Perhaps there is merit of a similar
kind in the religion which commanded us to look at the sinfulness of
every individual man with a magnifying-glass, and to make a great,
immortal criminal out of the sinner; in that it put eternal perspectives
around man, it taught him to see himself from a distance, and as
something past, something entire.


                                  79.

_The Charm of Imperfection._—I see here a poet, who, like so many men,
exercises a higher charm by his imperfections than by all that is
rounded off and takes perfect shape under his hands,—indeed, he derives
his advantage and reputation far more from his actual limitations than
from his abundant powers. His work never expresses altogether what he
would really like to express, what he _would like to have seen_: he
appears to have had the foretaste of a vision and never the vision
itself:—but an extraordinary longing for this vision has remained in his
soul; and from this he derives his equally extraordinary eloquence of
longing and craving. With this he raises those who listen to him above
his work and above all "works," and gives them wings to rise higher than
hearers have ever risen before, thus making them poets and seers
themselves; they then show an admiration for the originator of their
happiness, as if he had led them immediately to the vision of his
holiest and ultimate verities, as if he had reached his goal, and had
actually _seen_ and communicated his vision. It is to the advantage of
his reputation that he has not really arrived at his goal.


                                  80.

_Art and Nature._—The Greeks (or at least the Athenians) liked to hear
good talking: indeed they had an eager inclination for it, which
distinguished them more than anything else from non-Greeks. And so they
required good talking even from passion on the stage, and submitted to
the unnaturalness of dramatic verse with delight:—in nature, forsooth,
passion is so sparing of words! so dumb and confused! Or if it finds
words, so embarrassed and irrational and a shame to itself! We have now,
all of us, thanks to the Greeks, accustomed ourselves to this
unnaturalness on the stage, as we endure that other unnaturalness, the
_singing_ passion, and willingly endure it, thanks to the Italians.—It
has become a necessity to us, which we cannot satisfy out of the
resources of actuality, to hear men talk well and in full detail in the
most trying situations: it enraptures us at present when the tragic hero
still finds words, reasons, eloquent gestures, and on the whole a bright
spirituality, where life approaches the abysses, and where the actual
man mostly loses his head, and certainly his fine language. This kind of
_deviation from nature_ is perhaps the most agreeable repast for man's
pride: he loves art generally on account of it, as the expression of
high, heroic unnaturalness and convention. One rightly objects to the
dramatic poet when he does not transform everything into reason and
speech, but always retains a remnant of _silence_:—just as one is
dissatisfied with an operatic musician who cannot find a melody for the
highest emotion, but only an emotional, "natural" stammering and crying.
Here nature _has to_ be contradicted! Here the common charm of illusion
_has to_ give place to a higher charm! The Greeks go far, far in this
direction—frightfully far! As they constructed the stage as narrow as
possible and dispensed with all the effect of deep backgrounds, as they
made pantomime and easy motion impossible to the actor, and transformed
him into a solemn, stiff, masked bogey, so they have also deprived
passion itself of its deep background, and have dictated to it a law of
fine talk; indeed, they have really done everything to counteract the
elementary effect of representations that inspire pity and terror: _they
did not want pity and terror_,—with due deference, with the highest
deference to Aristotle! but he certainly did not hit the nail, to say
nothing of the head of the nail, when he spoke about the final aim of
Greek tragedy! Let us but look at the Grecian tragic poets with respect
to _what_ most excited their diligence, their inventiveness, and their
emulation,—certainly it was not the intention of subjugating the
spectators by emotion! The Athenian went to the theatre _to hear fine
talking_! And fine talking was arrived at by Sophocles!—pardon me this
heresy!—It is very different with _serious opera_: all its masters make
it their business to prevent their personages being understood. "An
occasional word picked up may come to the assistance of the inattentive
listener; but on the whole the situation must be self-explanatory,—the
_talking_ is of no account!"—so they all think, and so they have all
made fun of the words. Perhaps they have only lacked courage to express
fully their extreme contempt for words: a little additional insolence in
Rossini, and he would have allowed la-la-la-la to be sung throughout—and
it might have been the rational course! The personages of the opera are
_not_ meant to be believed "in their words," but in their tones! That is
the difference, that is the fine _unnaturalness_ on account of which
people go to the opera! Even the _recitativo secco_ is not really
intended to be heard as words and text: this kind of half-music is meant
rather in the first place to give the musical ear a little repose (the
repose from _melody_, as from the sublimest, and on that account the
most straining enjoyment of this art),—but very soon something different
results, namely, an increasing impatience, an increasing resistance, a
new longing for _entire_ music, for melody.—How is it with the art of
Richard Wagner as seen from this standpoint? Is it perhaps the same?
Perhaps otherwise? It would often seem to me as if one needed to have
learned by heart both the words _and_ the music of his creations before
the performances; for without that—so it seemed to me—one _may hear_
neither the words, nor even the music.


                                  81.

_Grecian Taste._—"What is beautiful in it?"—asked a certain
geometrician, after a performance of the _Iphigenia_—"there is nothing
proved in it!" Could the Greeks have been so far from this taste? In
Sophocles at least "everything is proved."


                                  82.

_Esprit Un-Grecian._—The Greeks were exceedingly logical and plain in
all their thinking; they did not get tired of it, at least during their
long flourishing period, as is so often the case with the French; who
too willingly made a little excursion into the opposite, and in fact
endure the spirit of logic only when it betrays its _sociable_ courtesy,
its sociable self-renunciation, by a multitude of such little excursions
into its opposite. Logic appears to them as necessary as bread and
water, but also like these as a kind of prison-fare, as soon as it is to
be taken pure and by itself. In good society one must never want to be
in the right absolutely and solely, as all pure logic requires; hence,
the little dose of irrationality in all French _esprit_.—The social
sense of the Greeks was far less developed than that of the French in
the present and the past; hence, so little _esprit_ in their cleverest
men, hence, so little wit, even in their wags, hence—alas! But people
will not readily believe these tenets of mine, and how much of the kind
I have still on my soul!—_Est res magna tacere_—says Martial, like all
garrulous people.


                                  83.

_Translations._—One can estimate the amount of the historical sense
which an age possesses by the way in which it makes _translations_ and
seeks to embody in itself past periods and literatures. The French of
Corneille, and even the French of the Revolution, appropriated Roman
antiquity in a manner for which we would no longer have the
courage—owing to our superior historical sense. And Roman antiquity
itself: how violently, and at the same time how naïvely, did it lay its
hand on everything excellent and elevated belonging to the older Grecian
antiquity! How they translated these writings into the Roman present!
How they wiped away intentionally and unconcernedly the wing-dust of the
butterfly moment! It is thus that Horace now and then translated Alcæus
or Archilochus, it is thus that Propertius translated Callimachus and
Philetas (poets of equal rank with Theocritus, if we _be allowed_ to
judge): of what consequence was it to them that the actual creator
experienced this and that, and had inscribed the indication thereof in
his poem!—as poets they were averse to the antiquarian, inquisitive
spirit which precedes the historical sense; as poets they did not
respect those essentially personal traits and names, nor anything
peculiar to city, coast, or century, such as its costume and mask, but
at once put the present and the Roman in its place. They seem to us to
ask: "Should we not make the old new for ourselves, and adjust
_ourselves_ to it? Should we not be allowed to inspire this dead body
with our soul? for it is dead indeed: how loathsome is everything
dead!"—They did not know the pleasure of the historical sense; the past
and the alien was painful to them, and as Romans it was an incitement to
a Roman conquest. In fact, they conquered when they translated,—not only
in that they omitted the historical: no, they added also allusions to
the present; above all, they struck out the name of the poet and put
their own in its place—not with the feeling of theft, but with the very
best conscience of the _imperium Romanum_.


                                  84.

_The Origin of Poetry._—The lovers of the fantastic in man, who at the
same time represent the doctrine of instinctive morality, draw this
conclusion: "Granted that utility has been honoured at all times as the
highest divinity, where then in all the world has poetry come from?—this
rhythmising of speech which thwarts rather than furthers plainness of
communication, and which, nevertheless, has sprung up everywhere on the
earth, and still springs up, as a mockery of all useful purpose! The
wildly beautiful irrationality of poetry refutes you, ye utilitarians!
The wish _to get rid of_ utility in some way—that is precisely what has
elevated man, that is what has inspired him to morality and art!" Well,
I must here speak for once to please the utilitarians,—they are so
seldom in the right that it is pitiful! In the old times which called
poetry into being, people had still utility in view with respect to it,
and a very important utility—at the time when rhythm was introduced into
speech, the force which arranges all the particles of the sentence anew,
commands the choosing of the words, recolours the thought, and makes it
more obscure, more foreign, and more distant: to be sure a
_superstitious utility_! It was intended that a human entreaty should be
more profoundly impressed upon the Gods by virtue of rhythm, after it
had been observed that men could remember a verse better than an
unmetrical speech. It was likewise thought that people could make
themselves audible at greater distances by the rhythmical beat; the
rhythmical prayer seemed to come nearer to the ear of the Gods. Above
all, however, people wanted to have the advantage of the elementary
conquest which man experiences in himself when he hears music: rhythm is
a constraint; it produces an unconquerable desire to yield, to join in;
not only the step of the foot, but also the soul itself follows the
measure,—probably the soul of the Gods also, as people thought! They
attempted, therefore, to _constrain_ the Gods by rhythm and to exercise
a power over them; they threw poetry around the Gods like a magic noose.
There was a still more wonderful idea, and it has perhaps operated most
powerfully of all in the originating of poetry. Among the Pythagoreans
it made its appearance as a philosophical doctrine and as an artifice of
teaching: but long before there were philosophers music was acknowledged
to possess the power of unburdening the emotions, of purifying the soul,
of soothing the _ferocia animi_—and this was owing to the rhythmical
element in music. When the proper tension and harmony of the soul were
lost a person had to _dance_ to the measure of the singer,—that was the
recipe of this medical art. By means of it Terpander quieted a tumult,
Empedocles calmed a maniac, Damon purged a love-sick youth; by means of
it even the maddened, revengeful Gods were treated for the purpose of a
cure. First of all, it was by driving the frenzy and wantonness of their
emotions to the highest pitch, by making the furious mad, and the
revengeful intoxicated with vengeance:—all the orgiastic cults seek to
discharge the _ferocia_ of a deity all at once and thus make an orgy, so
that the deity may feel freer and quieter afterwards, and leave man in
peace. _Melos_, according to its root, signifies a soothing means, not
because the song is gentle itself, but because its after-effect makes
gentle.—And not only in the religious song, but also in the secular song
of the most ancient times the prerequisite is that the rhythm should
exercise a magical influence; for example, in drawing water, or in
rowing: the song is for the enchanting of the spirits supposed to be
active thereby; it makes them obliging, involuntary, and the instruments
of man. And as often as a person acts he has occasion to sing, _every_
action is dependent on the assistance of spirits: magic song and
incantation appear to be the original form of poetry. When verse also
came to be used in oracles—the Greeks said that the hexameter was
invented at Delphi,—the rhythm was here also intended to exercise a
compulsory influence. To make a prophecy—that means originally
(according to what seems to me the probable derivation of the Greek
word) to determine something; people thought they could determine the
future by winning Apollo over to their side: he who, according to the
most ancient idea, is far more than a foreseeing deity. According as the
formula is pronounced with literal and rhythmical correctness, it
determines the future: the formula, however, is the invention of Apollo,
who as the God of rhythm, can also determine the goddesses of
fate.—Looked at and investigated as a whole, was there ever anything
_more serviceable_ to the ancient superstitious species of human being
than rhythm? People could do everything with it: they could make labour
go on magically; they could compel a God to appear, to be near at hand,
and listen to them; they could arrange the future for themselves
according to their will; they could unburden their own souls of any kind
of excess (of anxiety, of mania, of sympathy, of revenge), and not only
their own soul, but the souls of the most evil spirits,—without verse a
person was nothing, by means of verse a person became almost a God. Such
a fundamental feeling no longer allows itself to be fully
eradicated,—and even now, after millenniums of long labour in combating
such superstition, the very wisest of us occasionally becomes the fool
of rhythm, be it only that one _perceives_ a thought to be _truer_ when
it has a metrical form and approaches with a divine hopping. Is it not a
very funny thing that the most serious philosophers, however anxious
they are in other respects for strict certainty, still appeal to
_poetical sayings_ in order to give their thoughts force and
credibility?—and yet it is more dangerous to a truth when the poet
assents to it than when he contradicts it! For, as Homer says, "The
singers speak much falsehood!"—


                                  85.

_The Good and the Beautiful._—Artists _glorify_ continually—they do
nothing else,—and indeed they glorify all those conditions and things
that have a reputation, so that man may feel himself good or great, or
intoxicated, or merry, or pleased and wise by it. Those _select_ things
and conditions whose value for human _happiness_ is regarded as secure
and determined, are the objects of artists: they are ever lying in wait
to discover such things, to transfer them into the domain of art. I mean
to say that they are not themselves the valuers of happiness and of the
happy ones, but they always press close to these valuers with the
greatest curiosity and longing, in order immediately to use their
valuations advantageously. As besides their impatience, they have also
the big lungs of heralds and the feet of runners, they are likewise
always among the first to glorify the _new_ excellency, and often _seem_
to be those who first of all called it good and valued it as good. This,
however, as we have said, is an error; they are only faster and louder
than the actual valuers:—And who then are these?—They are the rich and
the leisurely.


                                  86.

_The Theatre._—This day has given me once more strong and elevated
sentiments, and if I could have music and art in the evening, I know
well what music and art I should _not_ like to have; namely, none of
that which would fain intoxicate its hearers and _excite_ them to a
crisis of strong and high feeling,—those men with commonplace souls, who
in the evening are not like victors on triumphal cars, but like tired
mules to whom life has rather too often applied the whip. What would
those men at all know of "higher moods," unless there were expedients
for causing ecstasy and idealistic strokes of the whip!—and thus they
have their inspirers as they have their wines. But what is their drink
and their drunkenness to _me_! Does the inspired one need wine? He
rather looks with a kind of disgust at the agency and the agent which
are here intended to produce an effect without sufficient reason,—an
imitation of the high tide of the soul! What? One gives the mole wings
and proud fancies—before going to sleep, before he creeps into his hole?
One sends him into the theatre and puts great magnifying-glasses to his
blind and tired eyes? Men, whose life is not "action" but business, sit
in front of the stage and look at strange beings to whom life is more
than business? "This is proper," you say, "this is entertaining, this is
what culture wants!"—Well then! culture is too often lacking in me, for
this sight is too often disgusting to me. He who has enough of tragedy
and comedy in himself surely prefers to remain away from the theatre;
or, as the exception, the whole procedure—theatre and public and poet
included—becomes for him a truly tragic and comic play, so that the
performed piece counts for little in comparison. He who is something
like Faust and Manfred, what does it matter to him about the Fausts and
Manfreds of the theatre!—while it certainly gives him something to think
about _that_ such figures are brought into the theatre at all. The
_strongest_ thoughts and passions before those who are not capable of
thought and passion—but of _intoxication_ only! And _those_ as a means
to this end! And theatre and music the hashish-smoking and betel-chewing
of Europeans! Oh, who will narrate to us the whole history of
narcotics!—It is almost the history of "culture," the so-called higher
culture!


                                  87.

_The Conceit of Artists._—I think artists often do not know what they
can do best, because they are too conceited, and have set their minds on
something loftier than those little plants appear to be, which can grow
up to perfection on their soil, fresh, rare, and beautiful. The final
value of their own garden and vineyard is superciliously underestimated
by them, and their love and their insight are not of the same quality.
Here is a musician, who, more than any one else, has the genius for
discovering the tones peculiar to suffering, oppressed, tortured souls,
and who can endow even dumb animals with speech. No one equals him in
the colours of the late autumn, in the indescribably touching happiness
of a last, a final, and all too short enjoyment; he knows a chord for
those secret and weird midnights of the soul when cause and effect seem
out of joint, and when every instant something may originate "out of
nothing." He draws his resources best of all out of the lower depths of
human happiness, and so to speak, out of its drained goblet, where the
bitterest and most nauseous drops have ultimately, for good or for ill,
commingled with the sweetest. He knows the weary shuffling along of the
soul which can no longer leap or fly, yea, not even walk; he has the shy
glance of concealed pain, of understanding without comfort, of
leave-taking without avowal; yea, as the Orpheus of all secret misery,
he is greater than anyone; and in fact much has been added to art by him
which was hitherto inexpressible and not even thought worthy of art, and
which was only to be scared away, by words, and not grasped—many small
and quite microscopic features of the soul: yes, he is the master of
miniature. But he does not _wish_ to be so! His _character_ is more in
love with large walls and daring frescoes! He fails to see that his
_spirit_ has a different taste and inclination, and prefers to sit
quietly in the corners of ruined houses:—concealed in this way,
concealed even from himself, he there paints his proper masterpieces,
all of which are very short, often only one bar in length,—there only
does he become quite good, great, and perfect, perhaps there only.—But
he does not know it! He is too conceited to know it.


                                  88.

_Earnestness for the Truth._—Earnest for the truth! What different
things men understand by these words! Just the same opinions, and modes
of demonstration and testing which a thinker regards as a frivolity in
himself, to which he has succumbed with shame at one time or other,—just
the same opinions may give to an artist, who comes in contact with them
and accepts them temporarily, the consciousness that the profoundest
earnestness for the truth has now taken hold of him, and that it is
worthy of admiration that, although an artist, he at the same time
exhibits the most ardent desire for the antithesis of the apparent. It
is thus possible that a person may, just by his pathos of earnestness,
betray how superficially and sparingly his intellect has hitherto
operated in the domain of knowledge.—And is not everything that we
consider _important_ our betrayer? It shows where our motives lie, and
where our motives are altogether lacking.


                                  89.

_Now and Formerly._—Of what consequence is all our art in artistic
products, if that higher art, the art of the festival, be lost by us?
Formerly all artistic products were exhibited on the great festive path
of humanity, as tokens of remembrance, and monuments of high and happy
moments. One now seeks to allure the exhausted and sickly from the great
suffering path of humanity for a wanton moment by means of works of art;
one furnishes them with a little ecstasy and insanity.


                                  90.

_Lights and Shades._—Books and writings are different with different
thinkers. One writer has collected together in his book all the rays of
light which he could quickly plunder and carry home from an illuminating
experience; while another gives only the shadows, and the grey and black
replicas of that which on the previous day had towered up in his soul.


                                  91.

_Precaution._—Alfieri, as is well known, told a great many falsehoods
when he narrated the history of his life to his astonished
contemporaries. He told falsehoods owing to the despotism toward himself
which he exhibited, for example, in the way in which he created his own
language, and tyrannised himself into a poet:—he finally found a rigid
form of sublimity into which he _forced_ his life and his memory; he
must have suffered much in the process.—I would also give no credit to a
history of Plato's life written by himself, as little as to Rousseau's,
or to the _Vita nuova_ of Dante.


                                  92.

_Prose and Poetry._—Let it be observed that the great masters of prose
have almost always been poets as well, whether openly, or only in secret
and for the "closet"; and in truth one only writes good prose _in view
of poetry_! For prose is an uninterrupted, polite warfare with poetry;
all its charm consists in the fact that poetry is constantly avoided,
and contradicted; every abstraction wants to have a gibe at poetry, and
wishes to be uttered with a mocking voice; all dryness and coolness is
meant to bring the amiable goddess into an amiable despair; there are
often approximations and reconciliations for the moment, and then a
sudden recoil and a burst of laughter; the curtain is often drawn up and
dazzling light let in just while the goddess is enjoying her twilights
and dull colours; the word is often taken out of her mouth and chanted
to a melody while she holds her fine hands before her delicate little
ears—and so there are a thousand enjoyments of the warfare, the defeats
included, of which the unpoetic, the so-called prose-men know nothing at
all:—they consequently write and speak only bad prose! _Warfare is the
father of all good things_, it is also the father of good prose!—There
have been four very singular and truly poetical men in this century who
have arrived at mastership in prose, for which otherwise this century is
not suited, owing to lack of poetry, as we have indicated. Not to take
Goethe into account, for he is reasonably claimed by the century that
produced him, I look only on Giacomo Leopardi, Prosper Mérimée, Ralph
Waldo Emerson, and Walter Savage Landor, the author of _Imaginary
Conversations_, as worthy to be called masters of prose.


                                  93.

_But why, then, do you Write?_—A: I do not belong to those who _think_
with the wet pen in hand; and still less to those who yield themselves
entirely to their passions before the open ink-bottle, sitting on their
chair and staring at the paper. I am always vexed and abashed by
writing; writing is a necessity for me,—even to speak of it in a simile
is disagreeable. B: But why, then, do you write? A: Well, my dear Sir,
to tell you in confidence, I have hitherto found no other means of
_getting rid of_ my thoughts. B: And why do you wish to get rid of them?
A: Why I wish? Do I really wish! I must.—B: Enough! Enough!


                                  94.

_Growth after Death._—Those few daring words about moral matters which
Fontenelle threw into his immortal _Dialogues of the Dead_, were
regarded by his age as paradoxes and amusements of a not unscrupulous
wit; even the highest judges of taste and intellect saw nothing more in
them,—indeed, Fontenelle himself perhaps saw nothing more. Then
something incredible takes place: these thoughts become truths! Science
proves them! The game becomes serious! And we read those dialogues with
a feeling different from that with which Voltaire and Helvetius read
them, and we involuntarily raise their originator into another and _much
higher_ class of intellects than they did.—Rightly? Wrongly?


                                  95.

_Chamfort._—That such a judge of men and of the multitude as Chamfort
should side with the multitude, instead of standing apart in
philosophical resignation and defence—I am at a loss to explain, except
as follows:—There was an instinct in him stronger than his wisdom, and
it had never been gratified: the hatred against all _noblesse_ of blood;
perhaps his mother's old and only too explicable hatred, which was
consecrated in him by love of her,—an instinct of revenge from his
boyhood, which waited for the hour to avenge his mother. But then the
course of his life, his genius, and alas! most of all, perhaps, the
paternal blood in his veins, had seduced him to rank and consider
himself equal to the _noblesse_—for many, many years! In the end,
however, he could not endure the sight of himself, the "old man" under
the old _régime_, any longer; he got into a violent, penitential
passion, and _in this state_ he put on the raiment of the populace as
_his_ special kind of hair-shirt! His bad conscience was the neglect of
revenge.—If Chamfort had then been a little more of the philosopher, the
Revolution would not have had its tragic wit and its sharpest sting; it
would have been regarded as a much more stupid affair, and would have
had no such seductive influence on men's minds. But Chamfort's hatred
and revenge educated an entire generation; and the most illustrious men
passed through his school. Let us but consider that Mirabeau looked up
to Chamfort as to his higher and older self, from whom he expected (and
endured) impulses, warnings, and condemnations,—Mirabeau, who as a man
belongs to an entirely different order of greatness, as the very
foremost among the statesman-geniuses of yesterday and to-day.—Strange,
that in spite of such a friend and advocate—we possess Mirabeau's
letters to Chamfort—this wittiest of all moralists has remained
unfamiliar to the French, quite the same as Stendhal, who has perhaps
had the most penetrating eyes and ears of any Frenchman of _this_
century. Is it because the latter had really too much of the German and
the Englishman in his nature for the Parisians to endure him?—while
Chamfort, a man with ample knowledge of the profundities and secret
motives of the soul, gloomy, suffering, ardent—a thinker who found
laughter necessary as the remedy of life, and who almost gave himself up
as lost every day that he had not laughed,—seems much more like an
Italian, and related by blood to Dante and Leopardi, than like a
Frenchman. One knows Chamfort's last words: "_Ah! mon ami_," he said to
Sieyès, "_je m'en vais enfin de ce monde, où il faut que le cœur se
brise ou se bronze_—." These were certainly not the words of a dying
Frenchman.


                                  96.

_Two Orators._—Of these two orators the one arrives at a full
understanding of his case only when he yields himself to emotion; it is
only this that pumps sufficient blood and heat into his brain to compel
his high intellectuality to reveal itself. The other attempts, indeed,
now and then to do the same: to state his case sonorously, vehemently,
and spiritedly with the aid of emotion,—but usually with bad success. He
then very soon speaks obscurely and confusedly; he exaggerates, makes
omissions, and excites suspicion of the justice of his case: indeed, he
himself feels this suspicion, and the sudden changes into the coldest
and most repulsive tones (which raise a doubt in the hearer as to his
passionateness being genuine) are thereby explicable. With him emotion
always drowns the spirit; perhaps because it is stronger than in the
former. But he is at the height of his power when he resists the
impetuous storm of his feeling, and as it were scorns it; it is then
only that his spirit emerges fully from its concealment, a spirit
logical, mocking, and playful, but nevertheless awe-inspiring.


                                  97.

_The Loquacity of Authors._—There is a loquacity of anger—frequent in
Luther, also in Schopenhauer. A loquacity which comes from too great a
store of conceptual formulæ, as in Kant. A loquacity which comes from
delight in ever new modifications of the same idea: one finds it in
Montaigne. A loquacity of malicious natures: whoever reads writings of
our period will recollect two authors in this connection. A loquacity
which comes from delight in fine words and forms of speech: by no means
rare in Goethe's prose. A loquacity which comes from pure satisfaction
in noise and confusion of feelings: for example in Carlyle.


                                  98.

_In Honour of Shakespeare._—The best thing I could say in honour of
Shakespeare, _the man_, is that he believed in Brutus and cast not a
shadow of suspicion on the kind of virtue which Brutus represents! It is
to him that Shakespeare consecrated his best tragedy—it is at present
still called by a wrong name,—to him and to the most terrible essence of
lofty morality. Independence of soul!—that is the question at issue! No
sacrifice can be too great there: one must be able to sacrifice to it
even one's dearest friend, though he be also the grandest of men, the
ornament of the world, the genius without peer,—if one really loves
freedom as the freedom of great souls, and if _this_ freedom be
threatened by him:—it is thus that Shakespeare must have felt! The
elevation in which he places Cæsar is the most exquisite honour he could
confer upon Brutus; it is thus only that he lifts into vastness the
inner problem of his hero, and similarly the strength of soul which
could cut _this knot_!—And was it actually political freedom that
impelled the poet to sympathy with Brutus,—and made him the accomplice
of Brutus? Or was political freedom merely a symbol for something
inexpressible? Do we perhaps stand before some sombre event or adventure
of the poet's own soul, which has remained unknown, and of which he only
cared to speak symbolically? What is all Hamlet-melancholy in comparison
with the melancholy of Brutus!—and perhaps Shakespeare also knew this,
as he knew the other, by experience! Perhaps he also had his dark hour
and his bad angel, just as Brutus had them!—But whatever similarities
and secret relationships of that kind there may have been, Shakespeare
cast himself on the ground and felt unworthy and alien in presence of
the aspect and virtue of Brutus:—he has inscribed the testimony thereof
in the tragedy itself. He has twice brought in a poet in it, and twice
heaped upon him such an impatient and extreme contempt, that it sounds
like a cry,—like the cry of self-contempt. Brutus, even Brutus loses
patience when the poet appears, self-important, pathetic, and obtrusive,
as poets usually are,—persons who seem to abound in the possibilities of
greatness, even moral greatness, and nevertheless rarely attain even to
ordinary uprightness in the philosophy of practice and of life. "He may
know the times, _but I know his temper_,—away with the jigging
fool!"—shouts Brutus. We may translate this back into the soul of the
poet that composed it.


                                  99.

_The Followers of Schopenhauer._—What one sees at the contact of
civilized peoples with barbarians,—namely, that the lower civilization
regularly accepts in the first place the vices, weaknesses, and excesses
of the higher; then, from that point onward, feels the influence of a
charm; and finally, by means of the appropriated vices and weaknesses,
also allows something of the valuable influence of the higher culture to
leaven it:—one can also see this close at hand and without journeys to
barbarian peoples, to be sure, somewhat refined and spiritualised, and
not so readily palpable. What are the German followers of _Schopenhauer_
still accustomed to receive first of all from their master:—those who,
when placed beside his superior culture, must deem themselves
sufficiently barbarous to be first of all barbarously fascinated and
seduced by him. Is it his hard matter-of-fact sense, his inclination to
clearness and rationality, which often makes him appear so English, and
so unlike Germans? Or the strength of his intellectual conscience, which
_endured_ a life-long contradiction of "being" and "willing," and
compelled him to contradict himself constantly even in his writings on
almost every point? Or his purity in matters relating to the Church and
the Christian God?—for here he was pure as no German philosopher had
been hitherto, so that he lived and died "as a Voltairian." Or his
immortal doctrines of the intellectuality of intuition, the apriority of
the law of causality, the instrumental nature of the intellect, and the
non-freedom of the will? No, nothing of this enchants, nor is felt as
enchanting; but Schopenhauer's mystical embarrassments and shufflings in
those passages where the matter-of-fact thinker allowed himself to be
seduced and corrupted by the vain impulse to be the unraveller of the
world's riddle: his undemonstrable doctrine of _one will_ ("all causes
are merely occasional causes of the phenomenon of the will at such a
time and at such a place," "the will to live, whole and undivided, is
present in every being, even in the smallest, as perfectly as in the sum
of all that was, is, and will be"); his _denial of the individual_ ("all
lions are really only one lion," "plurality of individuals is an
appearance," as also _development_ is only an appearance: he calls the
opinion of Lamarck "an ingenious, absurd error"); his fantasy about
_genius_ ("in æsthetic contemplation the individual is no longer an
individual, but a pure, will-less, painless, timeless subject of
knowledge," "the subject, in that it entirely merges in the contemplated
object, has become this object itself"); his nonsense about _sympathy_,
and about the outburst of the _principium individuationis_ thus rendered
possible, as the source of all morality; including also such assertions
as, "dying is really the design of existence," "the possibility should
not be absolutely denied that a magical effect could proceed from a
person already dead":—these, and similar _extravagances_ and vices of
the philosopher, are always first accepted and made articles of faith;
for vices and extravagances are always easiest to imitate, and do not
require a long preliminary practice. But let us speak of the most
celebrated of the living Schopenhauerians, Richard Wagner.—It has
happened to him as it has already happened to many an artist: he made a
mistake in the interpretation of the characters he created, and
misunderstood the unexpressed philosophy of the art peculiarly his own.
Richard Wagner allowed himself to be misled by Hegel's influence till
the middle of his life; and he did the same again when later on he read
Schopenhauer's doctrine between the lines of his characters, and began
to express himself with such terms as "will," "genius," and "sympathy."
Nevertheless it will remain true that nothing is more counter to
Schopenhauer's spirit than the essentially Wagnerian element in Wagner's
heroes: I mean the innocence of the supremest selfishness, the belief in
strong passion as the good in itself, in a word, the Siegfried trait in
the countenances of his heroes. "All that still smacks more of Spinoza
than of me,"—Schopenhauer would probably have said. Whatever good
reasons, therefore, Wagner might have had to be on the outlook for other
philosophers than Schopenhauer, the enchantment to which he succumbed in
respect to this thinker, not only made him blind towards all other
philosophers, but even towards science itself; his entire art is more
and more inclined to become the counterpart and complement of the
Schopenhauerian philosophy, and it always renounces more emphatically
the higher ambition to become the counterpart and complement of human
knowledge and science. And not only is he allured thereto by the whole
mystic pomp of this philosophy (which would also have allured a
Cagliostro), the peculiar airs and emotions of the philosopher have all
along been seducing him as well! For example, Wagner's indignation about
the corruption of the German language is Schopenhauerian; and if one
should commend his imitation in this respect, it is nevertheless not to
be denied that Wagner's style itself suffers in no small degree from all
the tumours and turgidities, the sight of which made Schopenhauer so
furious; and that, in respect to the German-writing Wagnerians,
Wagneromania is beginning to be as dangerous as only some kinds of
Hegelomania have been. Schopenhauerian is Wagner's hatred of the Jews,
to whom he is unable to do justice, even in their greatest exploit: are
not the Jews the inventors of Christianity! The attempt of Wagner to
construe Christianity as a seed blown away from Buddhism, and his
endeavour to initiate a Buddhistic era in Europe, under a temporary
approximation to Catholic-Christian formulas and sentiments, are both
Schopenhauerian. Wagner's preaching in favour of pity in dealing with
animals is Schopenhauerian; Schopenhauer's predecessor here, as is well
known, was Voltaire, who already perhaps, like his successors, knew how
to disguise his hatred of certain men and things as pity towards
animals. At least Wagner's hatred of science, which manifests itself in
his preaching, has certainly not been inspired by the spirit of
charitableness and kindness—nor by the _spirit_ at all, as is
sufficiently obvious.—Finally, it is of little importance what the
philosophy of an artist is, provided it is only a supplementary
philosophy, and does not do any injury to his art itself. We cannot be
sufficiently on our guard against taking a dislike to an artist on
account of an occasional, perhaps very unfortunate and presumptuous
masquerade; let us not forget that the dear artists are all of them
something of actors—and must be so; it would be difficult for them to
hold out in the long run without stage-playing. Let us be loyal to
Wagner in that which is _true_ and original in him,—and especially in
this point, that we, his disciples, remain loyal to ourselves in that
which is true and original in us. Let us allow him his intellectual
humours and spasms, let us in fairness rather consider what strange
nutriments and necessaries an art like his _is entitled to_, in order to
be able to live and grow! It is of no account that he is often wrong as
a thinker; justice and patience are not _his_ affair. It is sufficient
that his life is right in his own eyes, and maintains its right,—the
life which calls to each of us: "Be a man, and do not follow me—but
thyself! thyself!" _Our_ life, also ought to maintain its right in our
own eyes! We also are to grow and blossom out of ourselves, free and
fearless, in innocent selfishness! And so, on the contemplation of such
a man, these thoughts still ring in my ears to-day, as formerly: "That
passion is better than stoicism or hypocrisy; that straightforwardness,
even in evil, is better than losing oneself in trying to observe
traditional morality; that the free man is just as able to be good as
evil, but that the unemancipated man is a disgrace to nature, and has no
share in heavenly or earthly bliss; finally, that _all who wish to be
free must become so through themselves_, and that freedom falls to
nobody's lot as a gift from Heaven." (_Richard Wagner in Bayreuth_, Vol.
I. of this Translation, pp. 199-200).


                                  100.

_Learning to do Homage._—One must learn the art of homage, as well as
the art of contempt. Whoever goes in new paths and has led many persons
therein, discovers with astonishment how awkward and incompetent all of
them are in the expression of their gratitude, and indeed how rarely
gratitude _is able_ even to express itself. It is always as if something
comes into people's throats when their gratitude wants to speak, so that
it only hems and haws, and becomes silent again. The way in which a
thinker succeeds in tracing the effect of his thoughts, and their
transforming and convulsing power, is almost a comedy: it sometimes
seems as if those who have been operated upon felt profoundly injured
thereby, and could only assert their independence, which they suspect to
be threatened, by all kinds of improprieties. It needs whole generations
in order merely to devise a courteous convention of gratefulness; it is
only very late that the period arrives when something of spirit and
genius enters into gratitude. Then there is usually some one who is the
great receiver of thanks, not only for the good he himself has done, but
mostly for that which has been gradually accumulated by his
predecessors, as a treasure of what is highest and best.


                                  101.

_Voltaire._—Wherever there has been a court, it has furnished the
standard of good-speaking, and with this also the standard of style for
writers. The court language, however, is the language of the courtier
who _has no profession_, and who even in conversations on scientific
subjects avoids all convenient, technical expressions, because they
smack of the profession; on that account the technical expression, and
everything that betrays the specialist, is a _blemish of style_ in
countries which have a court culture. At present, when all courts have
become caricatures of past and present times, one is astonished to find
even Voltaire unspeakably reserved and scrupulous on this point (for
example, in his judgments concerning such stylists as Fontenelle and
Montesquieu),—we are now, all of us, emancipated from court taste, while
Voltaire was its _perfecter_!


                                  102.

_A Word for Philologists._—It is thought that there are books so
valuable and royal that whole generations of scholars are well employed
when through their efforts these books are kept genuine and
intelligible,—to confirm this belief again and again is the purpose of
philology. It presupposes that the rare men are not lacking (though they
may not be visible), who actually know how to use such valuable
books:—those men perhaps who write such books themselves, or could write
them. I mean to say that philology presupposes a noble belief,—that for
the benefit of some few who are always "to come," and are not there, a
very great amount of painful, and even dirty labour has to be done
beforehand: it is all labour _in usum Delphinorum_.


                                  103.

_German Music._—German music, more than any other, has now become
European music; because the changes which Europe experienced through the
Revolution have therein alone found expression: it is only German music
that knows how to express the agitation of popular masses, the
tremendous artificial uproar, which does not even need to be very
noisy,—while Italian opera, for example, knows only the choruses of
domestics or soldiers, but not "the people." There is the additional
fact that in all German music a profound _bourgeois_ jealousy of the
_noblesse_ can be traced, especially a jealousy of _esprit_ and
_élégance_, as the expressions of a courtly, chivalrous, ancient, and
self-confident society. It is not music like that of Goethe's musician
at the gate, which was pleasing also "in the hall," and to the king as
well; it is not here said: "The knights looked on with martial air; with
bashful eyes the ladies." Even the Graces are not allowed in German
music without a touch of remorse; it is only with Pleasantness, the
country sister of the Graces that the German begins to feel morally at
ease—and from this point up to his enthusiastic, learned, and often
gruff "sublimity" (the Beethoven-like sublimity), he feels more and more
so. If we want to imagine the man of _this_ music,—well, let us just
imagine Beethoven as he appeared beside Goethe, say, at their meeting at
Teplitz: as semi-barbarism beside culture, as the masses beside the
nobility, as the good-natured man beside the good and more than "good"
man, as the visionary beside the artist, as the man needing comfort
beside the comforted, as the man given to exaggeration and distrust
beside the man of reason, as the crank and self-tormenter, as the
foolish, enraptured, blessedly unfortunate, sincerely immoderate man, as
the pretentious and awkward man,—and altogether as the "untamed man": it
was thus that Goethe conceived and characterised him, Goethe, the
exceptional German, for whom a music of equal rank has not yet been
found!—Finally, let us consider whether the present, continually
extending contempt of melody and the stunting of the sense for melody
among Germans should not be understood as a democratic impropriety and
an after-effect of the Revolution? For melody has such an obvious
delight in conformity to law, and such an aversion to everything
evolving, unformed and arbitrary, that it sounds like a note out of the
_ancient_ European regime, and as a seduction and re-duction back to it.


                                  104.

_The Tone of the German Language._—We know whence the German originated
which for several centuries has been the universal, literary language of
Germany. The Germans, with their reverence for everything that came from
the _court_, intentionally took the chancery style as their pattern in
all that they had to _write_, especially in their letters, records,
wills, &c. To write in the chancery style, that was to write in court
and government style,—that was regarded as something select compared
with the language of the city in which a person lived. People gradually
drew this inference, and spoke also as they wrote,—they thus became
still more select in the forms of their words, in the choice of their
terms and modes of expression, and finally also in their tones: they
affected a court tone when they spoke, and the affectation at last
became natural. Perhaps nothing quite similar has ever happened
elsewhere:—the predominance of the literary style over the talk, and the
formality and affectation of an entire people, becoming the basis of a
common and no longer dialectical language. I believe that the sound of
the German language in the Middle Ages, and especially after the Middle
Ages, was extremely rustic and vulgar; it has ennobled itself somewhat
during the last centuries, principally because it was found necessary to
imitate so many French, Italian, and Spanish sounds, and particularly on
the part of the German (and Austrian) nobility, who could not at all
content themselves with their mother-tongue. But notwithstanding this
practice, German must have sounded intolerably vulgar to Montaigne, and
even to Racine: even at present, in the mouths of travellers among the
Italian populace, it still sounds very coarse, sylvan, and hoarse, as if
it had originated in smoky rooms and outlandish districts.—Now I notice
that at present a similar striving after selectness of tone is spreading
among the former admirers of the chancery style, and that the Germans
are beginning to accommodate themselves to a peculiar "witchery of
sound," which might in the long run become an actual danger to the
German language,—for one may seek in vain for more execrable sounds in
Europe. Something mocking, cold, indifferent, and careless in the voice:
that is what at present sounds "noble" to the Germans—and I hear the
approval of this nobleness in the voices of young officials, teachers,
women, and trades-people; indeed, even the little girls already imitate
this German of the officers. For the officer, and in fact the Prussian
officer is the inventor of these tones: this same officer, who, as
soldier and professional man possesses that admirable tact for modesty
which the Germans as a whole might well imitate (German professors and
musicians included!). But as soon as he speaks and moves he is the most
immodest and inelegant figure in old Europe—no doubt unconsciously to
himself! And unconsciously also to the good Germans, who gaze at him as
the man of the foremost and most select society, and willingly let him
"give them his tone." And indeed he gives it to them!—in the first place
it is the sergeant-majors and non-commissioned officers that imitate his
tone and coarsen it. One should note the roars of command, with which
the German cities are absolutely surrounded at present, when there is
drilling at all the gates: what presumption, furious imperiousness, and
mocking coldness speaks in this uproar! Could the Germans actually be a
musical people?—It is certain that the Germans martialise themselves at
present in the tone of their language: it is probable that, being
exercised to speak martially, they will finally write martially also.
For habituation to definite tones extends deeply into the
character:—people soon have the words and modes of expression, and
finally also the thoughts which just suit these tones! Perhaps they
already write in the officers' style; perhaps I only read too little of
what is at present written in Germany to know this. But one thing I know
all the surer: the German public declarations which also reach places
abroad, are not inspired by German music, but just by that new tone of
tasteless arrogance. Almost in every speech of the foremost German
statesman, and even when he makes himself heard through his imperial
mouth-piece, there is an accent which the ear of a foreigner repudiates
with aversion: but the Germans endure it,—they endure themselves.


                                  105.

_The Germans as Artists._—When once a German actually experiences
passion (and not only, as is usual, the mere inclination to it), he then
behaves just as he must do in passion, and does not think further of his
behaviour. The truth is, however, that he then behaves very awkwardly
and uglily, and as if destitute of rhythm and melody; so that onlookers
are pained or moved thereby, but nothing more—_unless_ he elevate
himself to the sublimity and enrapturedness of which certain passions
are capable. Then even the German becomes _beautiful_. The perception of
the _height at which_ beauty begins to shed its charm even over Germans,
raises German artists to the height, to the supreme height, and to the
extravagances of passion: they have an actual, profound longing,
therefore, to get beyond, or at least to look beyond the ugliness and
awkwardness—into a better, easier, more southern, more sunny world. And
thus their convulsions are often merely indications that they would like
to _dance_: these poor bears in whom hidden nymphs and satyrs, and
sometimes still higher divinities, carry on their game!


                                  106.

_Music as Advocate._—"I have a longing for a master of the musical art,"
said an innovator to his disciple, "that he may learn from me my ideas
and speak them more widely in his language: I shall thus be better able
to reach men's ears and hearts. For by means of tones one can seduce men
to every error and every truth: who could _refute_ a tone?"—"You would,
therefore, like to be regarded as irrefutable?" said his disciple. The
innovator answered: "I should like the germ to become a tree. In order
that a doctrine may become a tree, it must be believed in for a
considerable period; in order that it may be believed in it must be
regarded as irrefutable. Storms and doubts and worms and wickedness are
necessary to the tree, that it may manifest its species and the strength
of its germ; let it perish if it is not strong enough! But a germ is
always merely annihilated,—not refuted!"—When he had said this, his
disciple called out impetuously: "But I believe in your cause, and
regard it as so strong that I will say everything against it, everything
that I still have in my heart."—The innovator laughed to himself and
threatened the disciple with his finger. "This kind of discipleship,"
said he then, "is the best, but it is dangerous, and not every kind of
doctrine can stand it."


                                  107.

_Our Ultimate Gratitude to Art._—If we had not approved of the Arts and
invented this sort of cult of the untrue, the insight into the general
untruth and falsity of things now given us by science—an insight into
delusion and error as conditions of intelligent and sentient
existence—would be quite unendurable. _Honesty_ would have disgust and
suicide in its train. Now, however, our honesty has a counterpoise which
helps us to escape such consequences;—namely, Art, as the _good-will_ to
illusion. We do not always restrain our eyes from rounding off and
perfecting in imagination: and then it is no longer the eternal
imperfection that we carry over the river of Becoming—for we think we
carry a _goddess_, and are proud and artless in rendering this service.
As an æsthetic phenomenon existence is still _endurable_ to us; and by
Art, eye and hand and above all the good conscience are given to us, _to
be able_ to make such a phenomenon out of ourselves. We must rest from
ourselves occasionally by contemplating and looking down upon ourselves,
and by laughing or weeping _over_ ourselves from an artistic remoteness:
we must discover the _hero_, and likewise the _fool_, that is hidden in
our passion for knowledge; we must now and then be joyful in our folly,
that we may continue to be joyful in our wisdom! And just because we are
heavy and serious men in our ultimate depth, and are rather weights than
men, there is nothing that does us so much good as the _fool's cap and
bells_: we need them in presence of ourselves—we need all arrogant,
soaring, dancing, mocking, childish and blessed Art, in order not to
lose the _free dominion over things_ which our ideal demands of us. It
would be _backsliding_ for us, with our susceptible integrity, to lapse
entirely into morality, and actually become virtuous monsters and
scarecrows, on account of the over-strict requirements which we here lay
down for ourselves. We ought also to _be able_ to stand _above_
morality, and not only stand with the painful stiffness of one who every
moment fears to slip and fall, but we should also be able to soar and
play above it! How could we dispense with Art for that purpose, how
could we dispense with the fool?—And as long as you are still _ashamed_
of yourselves in any way, you still do not belong to us!

-----

Footnote 8:

  Schiller's poem, "The Veiled Image of Sais," is again referred to
  here.—TR.




                               BOOK THIRD


                                  108.

_New Struggles._—After Buddha was dead people showed his shadow for
centuries afterwards in a cave,—an immense frightful shadow. God is
dead: but as the human race is constituted, there will perhaps be caves
for millenniums yet, in which people will show his shadow,—And we—we
have still to overcome his shadow!


                                  109.

_Let us be on our Guard._—Let us be on our guard against thinking that
the world is a living being. Where could it extend itself? What could it
nourish itself with? How could it grow and increase? We know tolerably
well what the organic is; and we are to reinterpret the emphatically
derivative, tardy, rare and accidental, which we only perceive on the
crust of the earth, into the essential, universal and eternal, as those
do who call the universe an organism? That disgusts me. Let us now be on
our guard against believing that the universe is a machine; it is
assuredly not constructed with a view to _one_ end; we invest it with
far too high an honour with the word "machine." Let us be on our guard
against supposing that anything so methodical as the cyclic motions of
our neighbouring stars obtains generally and throughout the universe;
indeed a glance at the Milky Way induces doubt as to whether there are
not many cruder and more contradictory motions there, and even stars
with continuous, rectilinearly gravitating orbits, and the like. The
astral arrangement in which we live is an exception; this arrangement,
and the relatively long durability which is determined by it, has again
made possible the exception of exceptions, the formation of organic
life. The general character of the world, on the other hand, is to all
eternity chaos; not by the absence of necessity, but in the sense of the
absence of order, structure, form, beauty, wisdom, and whatever else our
æsthetic humanities are called. Judged by our reason, the unlucky casts
are far oftenest the rule, the exceptions are not the secret purpose;
and the whole musical box repeats eternally its air, which can never be
called a melody,—and finally the very expression, "unlucky cast" is
already an anthropomorphising which involves blame. But how could we
presume to blame or praise the universe! Let us be on our guard against
ascribing to it heartlessness and unreason, or their opposites; it is
neither perfect, nor beautiful, nor noble; nor does it seek to be
anything of the kind, it does not at all attempt to imitate man! It is
altogether unaffected by our æsthetic and moral judgments! Neither has
it any self-preservative instinct, nor instinct at all; it also knows no
law. Let us be on our guard against saying that there are laws in
nature. There are only necessities: there is no one who commands, no one
who obeys, no one who transgresses. When you know that there is no
design, you know also that there is no chance: for it is only where
there is a world of design that the word "chance" has a meaning. Let us
be on our guard against saying that death is contrary to life. The
living being is only a species of dead being, and a very rare
species.—Let us be on our guard against thinking that the world
eternally creates the new. There are no eternally enduring substances;
matter is just another such error as the God of the Eleatics. But when
shall we be at an end with our foresight and precaution! When will all
these shadows of God cease to obscure us? When shall we have nature
entirely undeified! When shall we be permitted to _naturalise_ ourselves
by means of the pure, newly discovered, newly redeemed nature?


                                  110.

_Origin of Knowledge._—Throughout immense stretches of time the
intellect has produced nothing but errors; some of them proved to be
useful and preservative of the species: he who fell in with them, or
inherited them, waged the battle for himself and his offspring with
better success. Those erroneous articles of faith which were
successively transmitted by inheritance, and have finally become almost
the property and stock of the human species, are, for example, the
following:—that there are enduring things, that there are equal things,
that there are things, substances, and bodies, that a thing is what it
appears, that our will is free, that what is good for me is also good
absolutely. It was only very late that the deniers and doubters of such
propositions came forward,—it was only very late that truth made its
appearance as the most impotent form of knowledge. It seemed as if it
were impossible to get along with truth, our organism was adapted for
the very opposite; all its higher functions, the perceptions of the
senses, and in general every kind of sensation co-operated with those
primevally embodied, fundamental errors. Moreover, those propositions
became the very standards of knowledge according to which the "true" and
the "false" were determined—throughout the whole domain of pure logic.
The _strength_ of conceptions does not, therefore, depend on their
degree of truth, but on their antiquity, their embodiment, their
character as conditions of life. Where life and knowledge seemed to
conflict, there has never been serious contention; denial and doubt have
there been regarded as madness. The exceptional thinkers like the
Eleatics, who, in spite of this, advanced and maintained the antitheses
of the natural errors, believed that it was possible also _to live_
these counterparts: it was they who devised the sage as the man of
immutability, impersonality and universality of intuition, as one and
all at the same time, with a special faculty for that reverse kind of
knowledge; they were of the belief that their knowledge was at the same
time the principle of _life_. To be able to affirm all this, however,
they had to _deceive_ themselves concerning their own condition: they
had to attribute to themselves impersonality and unchanging permanence,
they had to mistake the nature of the philosophic individual, deny the
force of the impulses in cognition, and conceive of reason generally as
an entirely free and self-originating activity; they kept their eyes
shut to the fact that they also had reached their doctrines in
contradiction to valid methods, or through their longing for repose or
for exclusive possession or for domination. The subtler development of
sincerity and of scepticism finally made these men impossible; their
life also and their judgments turned out to be dependent on the primeval
impulses and fundamental errors of all sentient being.—The subtler
sincerity and scepticism arose whenever two antithetical maxims appeared
to be _applicable_ to life, because both of them were compatible with
the fundamental errors; where, therefore, there could be contention
concerning a higher or lower degree of _utility_ for life; and likewise
where new maxims proved to be, not in fact useful, but at least not
injurious, as expressions of an intellectual impulse to play a game that
was, like all games, innocent and happy. The human brain was gradually
filled with such judgments and convictions; and in this tangled skein
there arose ferment, strife and lust for power. Not only utility and
delight, but every kind of impulse took part in the struggle for
"truths": the intellectual struggle became a business, an attraction, a
calling, a duty, an honour—: cognizing and striving for the true finally
arranged themselves as needs among other needs. From that moment, not
only belief and conviction, but also examination, denial, distrust and
contradiction became _forces_; all "evil" instincts were subordinated to
knowledge, were placed in its service, and acquired the prestige of the
permitted, the honoured, the useful, and finally the appearance and
innocence of the _good_. Knowledge, thus became a portion of life
itself, and as life it became a continually growing power: until finally
the cognitions and those primeval, fundamental, errors clashed with each
other, both as life, both as power, both in the same man. The thinker is
now the being in whom the impulse to truth and those life-preserving
errors wage their first conflict, now that the impulse to truth has also
_proved_ itself to be a life-preserving power. In comparison with the
importance of this conflict everything else is indifferent; the final
question concerning the conditions of life is here raised, and the first
attempt is here made to answer it by experiment. How far is truth
susceptible of embodiment?—that is the question, that is the experiment.


                                  111.

_Origin of the Logical._—Where has logic originated in men's heads?
Undoubtedly out of the illogical, the domain of which must originally
have been immense. But numberless beings who reasoned otherwise than we
do at present, perished; albeit that they may have come nearer to truth
than we! Whoever, for example, could not discern the "like" often enough
with regard to food, and with regard to animals dangerous to him,
whoever, therefore, deduced too slowly, or was too circumspect in his
deductions, had smaller probability of survival than he who in all
similar things immediately divined the equality. The preponderating
inclination, however, to deal with the similar as the equal—an illogical
inclination, for there is nothing equal in itself—first created the
whole basis of logic. It was just so (in order that the conception of
substance might originate, this being indispensable to logic, although
in the strictest sense nothing actual corresponds to it) that for a long
period the changing process in things had to be overlooked, and remain
unperceived; the beings not seeing correctly had an advantage over those
who saw everything "in flux." In itself every high degree of
circumspection in conclusions, every sceptical inclination, is a great
danger to life. No living being would have been preserved unless the
contrary inclination—to affirm rather than suspend judgment, to mistake
and fabricate rather than wait, to assent rather than deny, to decide
rather than be in the right—had been cultivated with extraordinary
assiduity.—The course of logical thought and reasoning in our modern
brain corresponds to a process and struggle of impulses, which singly
and in themselves are all very illogical and unjust; we experience
usually only the result of the struggle, so rapidly and secretly does
this primitive mechanism now operate in us.


                                  112.

_Cause and Effect._—We say it is "explanation"; but it is only in
"description" that we are in advance of the older stages of knowledge
and science. We describe better,—we explain just as little as our
predecessors. We have discovered a manifold succession where the naïve
man and investigator of older cultures saw only two things, "cause" and
"effect," as it was said; we have perfected the conception of becoming,
but have not got a knowledge of what is above and behind the conception.
The series of "causes" stands before us much more complete in every
case; we conclude that this and that must first precede in order that
that other may follow—but we have not _grasped_ anything thereby. The
peculiarity, for example, in every chemical process seems a "miracle,"
the same as before, just like all locomotion; nobody has "explained"
impulse. How could we ever explain! We operate only with things which do
not exist, with lines, surfaces, bodies, atoms, divisible times,
divisible spaces—how can explanation ever be possible when we first make
everything a _conception_, our conception! It is sufficient to regard
science as the exactest humanising of things that is possible; we always
learn to describe ourselves more accurately by describing things and
their successions. Cause and effect: there is probably never any such
duality; in fact there is a _continuum_ before us, from which we isolate
a few portions;—just as we always observe a motion as isolated points,
and therefore do not properly see it, but infer it. The abruptness with
which many effects take place leads us into error; it is however only an
abruptness for us. There is an infinite multitude of processes in that
abrupt moment which escape us. An intellect which could see cause and
effect as a _continuum_, which could see the flux of events not
according to our mode of perception, as things arbitrarily separated and
broken—would throw aside the conception of cause and effect, and would
deny all conditionality.


                                  113.

_The Theory of Poisons._—So many things have to be united in order that
scientific thinking may arise, and all the necessary powers must have
been devised, exercised, and fostered singly! In their isolation,
however, they have very often had quite a different effect than at
present, when they are confined within the limits of scientific thinking
and kept mutually in check:—they have operated as poisons; for example,
the doubting impulse, the denying impulse, the waiting impulse, the
collecting impulse, the disintegrating impulse. Many hecatombs of men
were sacrificed ere these impulses learned to understand their
juxtaposition and regard themselves as functions of one organising force
in one man! And how far are we still from the point at which the
artistic powers and the practical wisdom of life shall co-operate with
scientific thinking, so that a higher organic system may be formed, in
relation to which the scholar, the physician, the artist, and the
lawgiver, as we know them at present, will seem sorry antiquities!


                                  114.

_The Extent of the Moral._—We construct a new picture, which we see
immediately with the aid of all the old experiences which we have had,
_always according to the degree_ of our honesty and justice. The only
events are moral events, even in the domain of sense-perception.


                                  115.

_The Four Errors._—Man has been reared by his errors: firstly, he saw
himself always imperfect; secondly, he attributed to himself imaginary
qualities; thirdly, he felt himself in a false position in relation to
the animals and nature; fourthly, he always devised new tables of
values, and accepted them for a time as eternal and unconditioned, so
that at one time this, and at another time that human impulse or state
stood first, and was ennobled in consequence. When one has deducted the
effect of these four errors, one has also deducted humanity, humaneness,
and "human dignity."


                                  116.

_Herd-Instinct._—Wherever we meet with a morality we find a valuation
and order of rank of the human impulses and activities. These valuations
and orders of rank are always the expression of the needs of a community
or herd: that which is in the first place to _its_ advantage—and in the
second place and third place—is also the authoritative standard for the
worth of every individual. By morality the individual is taught to
become a function of the herd, and to ascribe to himself value only as a
function. As the conditions for the maintenance of one community have
been very different from those of another community, there have been
very different moralities; and in respect to the future essential
transformations of herds and communities, states and societies, one can
prophesy that there will still be very divergent moralities. Morality is
the herd-instinct in the individual.


                                  117.

_The Herd's Sting of Conscience._—In the longest and remotest ages of
the human race there was quite a different sting of conscience from that
of the present day. At present one only feels responsible for what one
intends and for what one does, and we have our pride in ourselves. All
our professors of jurisprudence start with this sentiment of individual
independence and pleasure, as if the source of right had taken its rise
here from the beginning. But throughout the longest period in the life
of mankind there was nothing more terrible to a person than to feel
himself independent. To be alone, to feel independent, neither to obey
nor to rule, to represent an individual—that was no pleasure to a person
then, but a punishment; he was condemned "to be an individual." Freedom
of thought was regarded as discomfort personified. While we feel law and
regulation as constraint and loss, people formerly regarded egoism as a
painful thing, and a veritable evil. For a person to be himself, to
value himself according to his own measure and weight—that was then
quite distasteful. The inclination to such a thing would have been
regarded as madness; for all miseries and terrors were associated with
being alone. At that time the "free will" had bad conscience in close
proximity to it; and the less independently a person acted, the more the
herd-instinct, and not his personal character, expressed itself in his
conduct, so much the more moral did he esteem himself. All that did
injury to the herd, whether the individual had intended it or not, then
caused him a sting of conscience—and his neighbour likewise, indeed the
whole herd!—It is in this respect that we have most changed our mode of
thinking.


                                  118.

_Benevolence._—Is it virtuous when a cell transforms itself into the
function of a stronger cell? It must do so. And is it wicked when the
stronger one assimilates the other? It must do so likewise: it is
necessary, for it has to have abundant indemnity and seeks to regenerate
itself. One has therefore to distinguish the instinct of appropriation,
and the instinct of submission, in benevolence, according as the
stronger or the weaker feels benevolent. Gladness and covetousness are
united in the stronger person, who wants to transform something to his
function: gladness and desire-to-be-coveted in the weaker person, who
would like to become a function.—The former case is essentially pity, a
pleasant excitation of the instinct of appropriation at the sight of the
weaker: it is to be remembered, however, that "strong" and "weak" are
relative conceptions.


                                  119.

_No Altruism!_—I see in many men an excessive impulse and delight in
wanting to be a function; they strive after it, and have the keenest
scent for all those positions in which precisely _they_ themselves can
be functions. Among such persons are those women who transform
themselves into just that function of a man that is but weakly developed
in him, and then become his purse, or his politics, or his social
intercourse. Such beings maintain themselves best when they insert
themselves in an alien organism; if they do not succeed they become
vexed, irritated, and eat themselves up.


                                  120.

_Health of the Soul._—The favourite medico-moral formula (whose
originator was Ariston of Chios), "Virtue is the health of the soul,"
would, at least in order to be used, have to be altered to this: "Thy
virtue is the health of thy soul." For there is no such thing as health
in itself, and all attempts to define a thing in that way have
lamentably failed. It is necessary to know thy aim, thy horizon, thy
powers, thy impulses, thy errors, and especially the ideals and
fantasies of thy soul, in order to determine _what_ health implies even
for thy _body_. There are consequently innumerable kinds of physical
health; and the more one again permits the unique and unparalleled to
raise its head, the more one unlearns the dogma of the "Equality of
men," so much the more also must the conception of a normal health,
together with a normal diet and a normal course of disease, be abrogated
by our physicians. And then only would it be time to turn our thoughts
to the health and disease of the _soul_ and make the special virtue of
everyone consist in its health; but, to be sure, what appeared as health
in one person might appear as the contrary of health in another. In the
end the great question might still remain open: whether we could _do
without_ sickness, even for the development of our virtue, and whether
our thirst for knowledge and self-knowledge would not especially need
the sickly soul as well as the sound one; in short, whether the mere
will to health is not a prejudice, a cowardice, and perhaps an instance
of the subtlest barbarism and unprogressiveness.


                                  121.

_Life no Argument._—We have arranged for ourselves a world in which we
can live—by the postulating of bodies, lines, surfaces, causes and
effects, motion and rest, form and content: without these articles of
faith no one could manage to live at present! But for all that they are
still unproved. Life is no argument; error might be among the conditions
of life.


                                  122.

_The Element of Moral Scepticism in Christianity._—Christianity also has
made a great contribution to enlightenment, and has taught moral
scepticism in a very impressive and effective manner—accusing and
embittering, but with untiring patience and subtlety; it annihilated in
every individual the belief in his virtues: it made the great virtuous
ones, of whom antiquity had no lack, vanish for ever from the earth,
those popular men, who, in the belief in their perfection, walked about
with the dignity of a hero of the bull-fight. When, trained in this
Christian school of scepticism, we now read the moral books of the
ancients, for example those of Seneca and Epictetus, we feel a
pleasurable superiority, and are full of secret insight and
penetration,—it seems to us as if a child talked before an old man, or a
pretty, gushing girl before La Rochefoucauld:—we know better what virtue
is! After all, however, we have applied the same scepticism to all
_religious_ states and processes, such as sin, repentance, grace,
sanctification, &c., and have allowed the worm to burrow so well, that
we have now the same feeling of subtle superiority and insight even in
reading all Christian books:—we know also the religious feelings better!
And it is time to know them well and describe them well, for the pious
ones of the old belief die out also; let us save their likeness and
type, at least for the sake of knowledge.


                                  123.

_Knowledge more than a Means._—Also _without_ this passion—I refer to
the passion for knowledge—science would be furthered: science has
hitherto increased and grown up without it. The good faith in science,
the prejudice in its favour, by which States are at present dominated
(it was even the Church formerly), rests fundamentally on the fact that
the absolute inclination and impulse has so rarely revealed itself in
it, and that science is regarded _not_ as a passion, but as a condition
and an "ethos." Indeed, _amour-plaisir_ of knowledge (curiosity) often
enough suffices, _amour-vanité_ suffices, and habituation to it, with
the afterthought of obtaining honour and bread; it even suffices for
many that they do not know what to do with a surplus of leisure, except
to continue reading, collecting, arranging, observing and narrating;
their "scientific impulse" is their ennui. Pope Leo X. once (in the
brief to Beroaldus) sang the praise of science; he designated it as the
finest ornament and the greatest pride of our life, a noble employment
in happiness and in misfortune; "without it," he says finally, "all
human undertakings would be without a firm basis,—even with it they are
still sufficiently mutable and insecure!" But this rather sceptical
Pope, like all other ecclesiastical panegyrists of science, suppressed
his ultimate judgment concerning it. If one may deduce from his words
what is remarkable enough for such a lover of art, that he places
science above art, it is after all, however, only from politeness that
he omits to speak of that which he places high above all science: the
"revealed truth," and the "eternal salvation of the soul,"—what are
ornament, pride, entertainment and security of life to him, in
comparison thereto? "Science is something of secondary rank, nothing
ultimate or unconditioned, no object of passion"—this judgment was kept
back in Leo's soul: the truly Christian judgment concerning science! In
antiquity its dignity and appreciation were lessened by the fact that,
even among its most eager disciples, the striving after _virtue_ stood
foremost, and that people thought they had given the highest praise to
knowledge when they celebrated it as the best means to virtue. It is
something new in history that knowledge claims to be more than a means.


                                  124.

_In the Horizon of the Infinite._—We have left the land and have gone
aboard ship! We have broken down the bridge behind us,—nay, more, the
land behind us! Well, little ship! look out! Beside thee is the ocean;
it is true it does not always roar, and sometimes it spreads out like
silk and gold and a gentle reverie. But times will come when thou wilt
feel that it is infinite, and that there is nothing more frightful than
infinity. Oh, the poor bird that felt itself free, and now strikes
against the walls of this cage! Alas, if homesickness for the land
should attack thee, as if there had been more _freedom_ there,—and there
is no "land" any longer!


                                  125.

_The Madman._—Have you ever heard of the madman who on a bright morning
lighted a lantern and ran to the market-place calling out unceasingly:
"I seek God! I seek God!"—As there were many people standing about who
did not believe in God, he caused a great deal of amusement. Why! is he
lost? said one. Has he strayed away like a child? said another. Or does
he keep himself hidden? Is he afraid of us? Has he taken a sea-voyage?
Has he emigrated?—the people cried out laughingly, all in a hubbub. The
insane man jumped into their midst and transfixed them with his glances.
"Where is God gone?" he called out. "I mean to tell you! _We have killed
him_,—you and I! We are all his murderers! But how have we done it? How
were we able to drink up the sea? Who gave us the sponge to wipe away
the whole horizon? What did we do when we loosened this earth from its
sun? Whither does it now move? Whither do we move? Away from all suns?
Do we not dash on unceasingly? Backwards, sideways, forwards, in all
directions? Is there still an above and below? Do we not stray, as
through infinite nothingness? Does not empty space breathe upon us? Has
it not become colder? Does not night come on continually, darker and
darker? Shall we not have to light lanterns in the morning? Do we not
hear the noise of the grave-diggers who are burying God? Do we not smell
the divine putrefaction?—for even Gods putrefy! God is dead! God remains
dead! And we have killed him! How shall we console ourselves, the most
murderous of all murderers? The holiest and the mightiest that the world
has hitherto possessed, has bled to death under our knife,—who will wipe
the blood from us? With what water could we cleanse ourselves? What
lustrums, what sacred games shall we have to devise? Is not the
magnitude of this deed too great for us? Shall we not ourselves have to
become Gods, merely to seem worthy of it? There never was a greater
event,—and on account of it, all who are born after us belong to a
higher history than any history hitherto!"—Here the madman was silent
and looked again at his hearers; they also were silent and looked at him
in surprise. At last he threw his lantern on the ground, so that it
broke in pieces and was extinguished. "I come too early," he then said,
"I am not yet at the right time. This prodigious event is still on its
way, and is travelling,—it has not yet reached men's ears. Lightning and
thunder need time, the light of the stars needs time, deeds need time,
even after they are done, to be seen and heard. This deed is as yet
further from them than the furthest star,—_and yet they have done
it!_"—It is further stated that the madman made his way into different
churches on the same day, and there intoned his _Requiem aeternam deo_.
When led out and called to account, he always gave the reply: "What are
these churches now, if they are not the tombs and monuments of God?"—


                                  126.

_Mystical Explanations._—Mystical explanations are regarded as profound;
the truth is that they do not even go the length of being superficial.


                                  127.

_After-Effect of the most Ancient Religiousness._—The thoughtless man
thinks that the Will is the only thing that operates, that willing is
something simple, manifestly given, underived, and comprehensible in
itself. He is convinced that when he does anything, for example, when he
delivers a blow, it is _he_ who strikes, and he has struck because he
_willed_ to strike. He does not notice anything of a problem therein,
but the feeling of _willing_ suffices to him, not only for the
acceptance of cause and effect, but also for the belief that he
_understands_ their relationship. Of the mechanism of the occurrence and
of the manifold subtle operations that must be performed in order that
the blow may result, and likewise of the incapacity of the Will in
itself to effect even the smallest part of those operations—he knows
nothing. The Will is to him a magically operating force; the belief in
the Will as the cause of effects is the belief in magically operating
forces. In fact, whenever he saw anything happen, man originally
believed in a Will as cause, and in personally _willing_ beings
operating in the background,—the conception of mechanism was very remote
from him. Because, however, man for immense periods of time believed
only in persons (and not in matter, forces, things, &c.), the belief in
cause and effect has become a fundamental belief with him, which he
applies everywhere when anything happens,—and even still uses
instinctively as a piece of atavism of remotest origin. The
propositions, "No effect without a cause," and "Every effect again
implies a cause," appear as generalisations of several less general
propositions:—"Where there is operation there has been _willing_,"
"Operating is only possible on _willing_ beings." "There is never a
pure, resultless experience of activity, but every experience involves
stimulation of the Will" (to activity, defence, revenge or retaliation).
But in the primitive period of the human race, the latter and the former
propositions were identical, the first were not generalisations of the
second, but the second were explanations of the first.—Schopenhauer,
with his assumption that all that exists is something _volitional_, has
set a primitive mythology on the throne; he seems never to have
attempted an analysis of the Will, because he _believed_ like everybody
in the simplicity and immediateness of all volition:—while volition is
in fact such a cleverly practised mechanical process that it almost
escapes the observing eye. I set the following propositions against
those of Schopenhauer:—Firstly, in order that Will may arise, an idea of
pleasure and pain is necessary. Secondly, that a vigorous excitation may
be felt as pleasure or pain, is the affair of the _interpreting_
intellect, which, to be sure, operates thereby for the most part
unconsciously to us, and one and the same excitation _may_ be
interpreted as pleasure or pain. Thirdly, it is only in an intellectual
being that there is pleasure, displeasure and Will; the immense majority
of organisms have nothing of the kind.


                                  128.

_The Value of Prayer._—Prayer has been devised for such men as have
never any thoughts of their own, and to whom an elevation of the soul is
unknown, or passes unnoticed; what shall these people do in holy places
and in all important situations in life which require repose and some
kind of dignity? In order at least that they may not _disturb_, the
wisdom of all the founders of religions, the small as well as the great,
has commended to them the formula of prayer, as a long mechanical labour
of the lips, united with an effort of the memory, and with a uniform,
prescribed attitude of hands and feet—_and_ eyes! They may then, like
the Tibetans, chew the cud of their "_om mane padme hum_," innumerable
times, or, as in Benares, count the name of God Ram-Ram-Ram (and so on,
with or without grace) on their fingers; or honour Vishnu with his
thousand names of invocation, Allah with his ninety-nine; or they may
make use of the prayer-wheels and the rosary: the main thing is that
they are settled down for a time at this work, and present a tolerable
appearance; their mode of prayer is devised for the advantage of the
pious who have thought and elevation of their own. But even these have
their weary hours when a series of venerable words and sounds and a
mechanical, pious ritual does them good. But supposing that these rare
men—in every religion the religious man is an exception—know how to help
themselves, the poor in spirit do not know, and to forbid them the
prayer-babbling would mean to take their religion from them, a fact
which Protestantism brings more and more to light. All that religion
wants with such persons is that they should _keep still_ with their
eyes, hands, legs, and all their organs: they thereby become temporarily
beautified and—more human-looking!


                                  129.

_The Conditions for God._—"God himself cannot subsist without wise men,"
said Luther, and with good reason; but "God can still less subsist
without unwise men,"—good Luther did not say that!


                                  130.

_A Dangerous Resolution._—The Christian resolution to find the world
ugly and bad has made the world ugly and bad.


                                  131.

_Christianity and Suicide._—Christianity made use of the excessive
longing for suicide at the time of its origin as a lever for its power:
it left only two forms of suicide, invested them with the highest
dignity and the highest hopes, and forbade all others in a dreadful
manner. But martyrdom and the slow self-annihilation of the ascetic were
permitted.


                                  132.

_Against Christianity._—It is now no longer our reason, but our taste
that decides against Christianity.


                                  133.

_Axioms._—An unavoidable hypothesis on which mankind must always fall
back again, is, in the long run, _more powerful_ than the most firmly
believed belief in something untrue (like the Christian belief). In the
long run: that means a hundred thousand years from now.


                                  134.

_Pessimists as Victims._—When a profound dislike of existence gets the
upper hand, the after-effect of a great error in diet of which a people
has been long guilty comes to light. The spread of Buddhism (_not_ its
origin) is thus to a considerable extent dependent on the excessive and
almost exclusive rice-fare of the Indians, and on the universal
enervation that results therefrom. Perhaps the modern, European
discontentedness is to be looked upon as caused by the fact that the
world of our forefathers, the whole Middle Ages, was given to drink,
owing to the influence of German tastes in Europe: the Middle Ages, that
means the alcoholic poisoning of Europe.—The German dislike of life
(including the influence of the cellar-air and stove-poison in German
dwellings), is essentially a cold-weather complaint.


                                  135.

_Origin of Sin._—Sin, as it is at present felt wherever Christianity
prevails or has prevailed, is a Jewish feeling and a Jewish invention;
and in respect to this background of all Christian morality,
Christianity has in fact aimed at "Judaising" the whole world. To what
an extent this has succeeded in Europe is traced most accurately in the
extent of our alienness to Greek antiquity—a world without the feeling
of sin—in our sentiments even at present; in spite of all the good will
to approximation and assimilation, which whole generations and many
distinguished individuals have not failed to display. "Only when thou
_repentest_ is God gracious to thee"—that would arouse the laughter or
the wrath of a Greek: he would say, "Slaves may have such sentiments."
Here a mighty being, an almighty being, and yet a revengeful being, is
presupposed; his power is so great that no injury whatever can be done
to him, except in the point of honour. Every sin is an infringement of
respect, a _crimen læsæ majestatis divinæ_—and nothing more! Contrition,
degradation, rolling-in-the-dust,—these are the first and last
conditions on which his favour depends: the restoration, therefore, of
his divine honour! If injury be caused otherwise by sin, if a profound,
spreading evil be propagated by it, an evil which, like a disease,
attacks and strangles one man after another—that does not trouble this
honour-craving Oriental in heaven; sin is an offence against him, not
against mankind!—to him on whom he has bestowed his favour he bestows
also this indifference to the natural consequences of sin. God and
mankind are here thought of as separated, as so antithetical that sin
against the latter cannot be at all possible,—all deeds are to be looked
upon _solely with respect to their supernatural consequences_, and not
with respect to their natural results: it is thus that the Jewish
feeling, to which all that is natural seems unworthy in itself, would
have things. The _Greeks_, on the other hand, were more familiar with
the thought that transgression also may have dignity,—even theft, as in
the case of Prometheus, even the slaughtering of cattle as the
expression of frantic jealousy, as in the case of Ajax; in their need to
attribute dignity to transgression and embody it therein, they invented
_tragedy_,—an art and a delight, which in its profoundest essence has
remained alien to the Jew, in spite of all his poetic endowment and
taste for the sublime.


                                  136.

_The Chosen People._—The Jews, who regard themselves as the chosen
people among the nations, and that too because they are the moral genius
among the nations (in virtue of their capacity for _despising_ the human
in themselves _more_ than any other people)—the Jews have a pleasure in
their divine monarch and saint similar to that which the French nobility
had in Louis XIV. This nobility had allowed its power and autocracy to
be taken from it, and had become contemptible: in order not to feel
this, in order to be able to forget it, an _unequalled_ royal
magnificence, royal authority and plenitude of power was needed, to
which there was access only for the nobility. As in accordance with this
privilege they raised themselves to the elevation of the court, and from
that elevation saw everything under them,—saw everything
contemptible,—they got beyond all uneasiness of conscience. They thus
elevated intentionally the tower of the royal power more and more into
the clouds, and set the final coping-stone of their own power thereon.


                                  137.

_Spoken in Parable._—A Jesus Christ was only possible in a Jewish
landscape—I mean in one over which the gloomy and sublime thunder-cloud
of the angry Jehovah hung continually. Here only was the rare, sudden
flashing of a single sunbeam through the dreadful, universal and
continuous nocturnal-day regarded as a miracle of "love," as a beam of
the most unmerited "grace." Here only could Christ dream of his rainbow
and celestial ladder on which God descended to man; everywhere else the
clear weather and the sun were considered the rule and the commonplace.


                                  138.

_The Error of Christ._—The founder of Christianity thought there was
nothing from which men suffered so much as from their sins:—it was his
error, the error of him who felt himself without sin, to whom experience
was lacking in this respect! It was thus that his soul filled with that
marvellous, fantastic pity which had reference to a trouble that even
among his own people, the inventors of sin, was rarely a great trouble!
But Christians understood subsequently how to do justice to their
master, and to sanctify his error into a "truth."


                                  139.

_Colour of the Passions._—Natures such as the apostle Paul, have an evil
eye for the passions; they learn to know only the filthy, the
distorting, and the heart-breaking in them,—their ideal aim, therefore,
is the annihilation of the passions; in the divine they see complete
purification from passion. The Greeks, quite otherwise than Paul and the
Jews, directed their ideal aim precisely to the passions, and loved,
elevated, embellished and deified them: in passion they evidently not
only felt themselves happier, but also purer and diviner than
otherwise.—And now the Christians? Have they wished to become Jews in
this respect? Have they perhaps become Jews!


                                  140.

_Too Jewish._—If God had wanted to become an object of love, he would
first of all have had to forgo judging and justice:—a judge, and even a
gracious judge, is no object of love. The founder of Christianity showed
too little of the finer feelings in this respect—being a Jew.


                                  141.

_Too Oriental._—What? A God who loves men, provided that they believe in
him, and who hurls frightful glances and threatenings at him who does
not believe in this love! What? A conditioned love as the feeling of an
almighty God! A love which has not even become master of the sentiment
of honour and of the irritable desire for vengeance! How Oriental is all
that! "If I love thee, what does it concern thee?"[9] is already a
sufficient criticism of the whole of Christianity.


                                  142.

_Frankincense._—Buddha says: "Do not flatter thy benefactor!" Let one
repeat this saying in a Christian church:—it immediately purifies the
air of all Christianity.


                                  143.

_The Greatest Utility of Polytheism._—For the individual to set up his
_own_ ideal and derive from it his laws, his pleasures and his
rights—_that_ has perhaps been hitherto regarded as the most monstrous
of all human aberrations, and as idolatry in itself; in fact, the few
who have ventured to do this have always needed to apologise to
themselves, usually in this wise: "Not I! not I! but _a God_, through my
instrumentality!" It was in the marvellous art and capacity for creating
Gods—in polytheism—that this impulse was permitted to discharge itself,
it was here that it became purified, perfected, and ennobled; for it was
originally a commonplace and unimportant impulse, akin to stubbornness,
disobedience and envy. To be _hostile_ to this impulse towards the
individual ideal,—that was formerly the law of every morality. There was
then only one norm, "the man"—and every people believed that it _had_
this one and ultimate norm. But above himself, and outside of himself,
in a distant over-world, a person could see a _multitude of norms_: the
one God was not the denial or blasphemy of the other Gods! It was here
that individuals were first permitted, it was here that the right of
individuals was first respected. The inventing of Gods, heroes and
supermen of all kinds, as well as co-ordinate men and undermen—dwarfs,
fairies, centaurs, satyrs, demons, devils—was the inestimable
preliminary to the justification of the selfishness and sovereignty of
the individual: the freedom which was granted to one God in respect to
other Gods, was at last given to the individual himself in respect to
laws, customs and neighbours. Monotheism, on the contrary, the rigid
consequence of the doctrine of one normal human being—consequently the
belief in a normal God, beside whom there are only false, spurious
Gods—has perhaps been the greatest danger of mankind in the past: man
was then threatened by that premature state of inertia, which, so far as
we can see, most of the other species of animals reached long ago, as
creatures who all believe in one normal animal and ideal in their
species, and definitely translated their morality of custom into flesh
and blood. In polytheism man's free-thinking and many-sided thinking had
a prototype set up: the power to create for himself new and individual
eyes, always newer and more individualised: so that it is for man alone,
of all the animals, that there are no _eternal_ horizons and
perspectives.


                                  144.

_Religious Wars._—The greatest advance of the masses hitherto has been
religious war, for it proves that the masses have begun to deal
reverently with conceptions of things. Religious wars only result, when
human reason generally has been refined by the subtle disputes of sects;
so that even the populace becomes punctilious and regards trifles as
important, actually thinking it possible that the "eternal salvation of
the soul" may depend upon minute distinctions of concepts.


                                  145.

_Danger of Vegetarians._—The immense prevalence of rice-eating impels to
the use of opium and narcotics, in like manner as the immense prevalence
of potato-eating impels to the use of brandy:—it also impels, however,
in its more subtle after-effects to modes of thought and feeling which
operate narcotically. This is in accord with the fact that those who
promote narcotic modes of thought and feeling, like those Indian
teachers, praise a purely vegetable diet, and would like to make it a
law for the masses: they want thereby to call forth and augment the need
which _they_ are in a position to satisfy.


                                  146.

_German Hopes._—Do not let us forget that the names of peoples are
generally names of reproach. The Tartars, for example, according to
their name, are "the dogs"; they were so christened by the Chinese.
"_Deutschen_" (Germans) means originally "heathen": it is thus that the
Goths after their conversion named the great mass of their unbaptized
fellow-tribes, according to the indication in their translation of the
Septuagint, in which the heathen are designated by the word which in
Greek signifies "the nations." (See Ulfilas.)—It might still be possible
for the Germans to make an honourable name ultimately out of their old
name of reproach, by becoming the first _non-Christian_ nation of
Europe; for which purpose Schopenhauer, to their honour, regarded them
as highly qualified. The work of _Luther_ would thus be consummated,—he
who taught them to be anti-Roman and to say: "Here _I_ stand! _I_ cannot
do otherwise!"—


                                  147.

_Question and Answer._—What do savage tribes at present accept first of
all from Europeans? Brandy and Christianity, the European narcotics.—And
by what means are they fastest ruined?—By the European narcotics.


                                  148.

_Where Reformations Originate._—At the time of the great corruption of
the church it was least of all corrupt in Germany: it was on that
account that the Reformation originated _here_, as a sign that even the
beginnings of corruption were felt to be unendurable. For, comparatively
speaking, no people was ever more Christian than the Germans at the time
of Luther; their Christian culture was just about to burst into bloom
with a hundred-fold splendour,—one night only was still lacking; but
that night brought the storm which put an end to all.


                                  149.

_The Failure of Reformations._—It testifies to the higher culture of the
Greeks, even in rather early ages, that attempts to establish new
Grecian religions frequently failed; it testifies that quite early there
must have been a multitude of dissimilar individuals in Greece, whose
dissimilar troubles were not cured by a single recipe of faith and hope.
Pythagoras and Plato, perhaps also Empedocles, and already much earlier
the Orphic enthusiasts, aimed at founding new religions; and the two
first-named were so endowed with the qualifications for founding
religions, that one cannot be sufficiently astonished at their failure:
they just reached the point of founding sects. Every time that the
Reformation of an entire people fails and only sects raise their heads,
one may conclude that the people already contains many types, and has
begun to free itself from the gross herding instincts and the morality
of custom,—a momentous state of suspense, which one is accustomed to
disparage as decay of morals and corruption, while it announces the
maturing of the egg and the early rupture of the shell. That Luther's
Reformation succeeded in the north, is a sign that the north had
remained backward in comparison with the south of Europe, and still had
requirements tolerably uniform in colour and kind; and there would have
been no Christianising of Europe at all, if the culture of the old world
of the south had not been gradually barbarized by an excessive admixture
of the blood of German barbarians, and thus lost its ascendency. The
more universally and unconditionally an individual, or the thought of an
individual, can operate, so much more homogeneous and so much lower must
be the mass that is there operated upon; while counter-strivings betray
internal counter-requirements, which also want to gratify and realise
themselves. Reversely, one may always conclude with regard to an actual
elevation of culture, when powerful and ambitious natures only produce a
limited and sectarian effect: this is true also for the separate arts,
and for the provinces of knowledge. Where there is ruling there are
masses: where there are masses there is need of slavery. Where there is
slavery the individuals are but few, and have the instincts and
conscience of the herd opposed to them.


                                  150.

_Criticism of Saints._—Must one then, in order to have a virtue, be
desirous of having it precisely in its most brutal form?—as the
Christian saints desired and needed;—those who only _endured_ life with
the thought that at the sight of their virtue self-contempt might seize
every man. A virtue with such an effect I call brutal.


                                  151.

_The Origin of Religion._—The metaphysical requirement is not the origin
of religions, as Schopenhauer claims, but only a _later sprout_ from
them. Under the dominance of religious thoughts we have accustomed
ourselves to the idea of "another (back, under, or upper) world," and
feel an uncomfortable void and privation through the annihilation of the
religious illusion;—and then "another world" grows out of this feeling
once more, but now it is only a metaphysical world, and no longer a
religious one. That however which in general led to the assumption of
"another world" in primitive times, was _not_ an impulse or requirement,
but an _error_ in the interpretation of certain natural phenomena, a
difficulty of the intellect.


                                  152.

_The greatest Change._—The lustre and the hues of all things have
changed! We no longer quite understand how earlier men conceived of the
most familiar and frequent things,—for example, of the day, and the
awakening in the morning: owing to their belief in dreams the waking
state seemed to them differently illuminated. And similarly of the whole
of life, with its reflection of death and its significance: our "death"
is an entirely different death. All events were of a different lustre,
for a God shone forth in them; and similarly of all resolutions and
peeps into the distant future: for people had oracles, and secret hints,
and believed in prognostication. "Truth" was conceived in quite a
different manner, for the insane could formerly be regarded as its
mouthpiece—a thing which makes _us_ shudder, or laugh. Injustice made a
different impression on the feelings: for people were afraid of divine
retribution, and not only of legal punishment and disgrace. What joy was
there in an age when men believed in the devil and tempter! What passion
was there when people saw demons lurking close at hand! What philosophy
was there when doubt was regarded as sinfulness of the most dangerous
kind, and in fact as an outrage on eternal love, as distrust of
everything good, high, pure, and compassionate!—We have coloured things
anew, we paint them over continually,—but what have we been able to do
hitherto in comparison with the _splendid colouring_ of that old
master!—I mean ancient humanity.


                                  153.

_Homo poeta._—"I myself who have made this tragedy of tragedies
altogether independently, in so far as it is completed; I who have first
entwined the perplexities of morality about existence, and have
tightened them so that only a God could unravel them—so Horace
demands!—I have already in the fourth act killed all the Gods—for the
sake of morality! What is now to be done about the fifth act? Where
shall I get the tragic _dénouement_! Must I now think about a comic
_dénouement_?"


                                  154.

_Differences in the Dangerousness of Life._—You don't know at all what
you experience; you run through life as if intoxicated, and now and then
fall down a stair. Thanks however to your intoxication you still do not
break your limbs: your muscles are too languid and your head too
confused to find the stones of the staircase as hard as we others do!
For us life is a greater danger: we are made of glass—alas, if we should
_strike against_ anything! And all is lost if we should _fall_!


                                  155.

_What we Lack._—We love the _grandeur_ of Nature and have discovered it;
that is because human grandeur is lacking in our minds. It was the
reverse with the Greeks: their feeling towards Nature was quite
different from ours.


                                  156.

_The most Influential Person._—The fact that a person resists the whole
spirit of his age, stops it at the door, and calls it to account, _must_
exert an influence! It is indifferent whether he wishes to exert an
influence; the point is that he _can_.


                                  157.

_Mentiri._—Take care!—he reflects: he will have a lie ready immediately.
This is a stage in the civilisation of whole nations. Consider only what
the Romans expressed by _mentiri_!


                                  158.

_An Inconvenient Peculiarity._—To find everything deep is an
inconvenient peculiarity: it makes one constantly strain one's eyes, so
that in the end one always finds more than one wishes.


                                  159.

_Every Virtue has its Time._—The honesty of him who is at present
inflexible often causes him remorse; for inflexibility is the virtue of
a time different from that in which honesty prevails.


                                  160.

_In Intercourse with Virtues._—One can also be undignified and
flattering towards a virtue.


                                  161.

_To the Admirers of the Age._—The runaway priest and the liberated
criminal are continually making grimaces; what they want is a look
without a past.—But have you ever seen men who know that their looks
reflect the future, and who are so courteous to you, the admirers of the
"age," that they assume a look without a future.


                                  162.

_Egoism._—Egoism is the _perspective_ law of our sentiment, according to
which the near appears large and momentous, while in the distance the
magnitude and importance of all things diminish.


                                  163.

_After a Great Victory._—The best thing in a great victory is that it
deprives the conqueror of the fear of defeat. "Why should I not be
worsted for once?" he says to himself, "I am now rich enough to stand
it."


                                  164.

_Those who Seek Repose._—I recognise the minds that seek repose by the
many _dark_ objects with which they surround themselves: those who want
to sleep darken their chambers, or creep into caverns. A hint to those
who do not know what they really seek most, and would like to know!


                                  165.

_The Happiness of Renunciation._—He who has absolutely dispensed with
something for a long time will almost imagine, when he accidentally
meets with it again, that he has discovered it,—and what happiness every
discoverer has! Let us be wiser than the serpents that lie too long in
the same sunshine.


                                  166.

_Always in our own Society._—All that is akin to me in nature and
history speaks to me, praises me, urges me forward and comforts me—:
other things are unheard by me, or immediately forgotten. We are only in
our own society always.


                                  167.

_Misanthropy and Philanthropy._—We only speak about being sick of men
when we can no longer digest them, and yet have the stomach full of
them. Misanthropy is the result of a far too eager philanthropy and
"cannibalism,"—but who ever bade you swallow men like oysters, my Prince
Hamlet!


                                  168.

_Concerning an Invalid._—"Things go badly with him!"—What is wrong?—"He
suffers from the longing to be praised, and finds no sustenance for
it."—Inconceivable! All the world does honour to him, and he is
reverenced not only in deed but in word!—"Certainly, but he is dull of
hearing for the praise. When a friend praises him it sounds to him as if
the friend praised himself; when an enemy praises him, it sounds to him
as if the enemy wanted to be praised for it; when, finally, some one
else praises him—there are by no means so many of these, he is so
famous!—he is offended because they neither want him for a friend nor
for an enemy; he is accustomed to say: 'What do I care for those who can
still pose as the all-righteous towards me!'"


                                  169.

_Avowed Enemies._—Bravery in presence of an enemy is a thing by itself:
a person may possess it and still be a coward and an irresolute
numskull. That was Napoleon's opinion concerning the "bravest man" he
knew, Murat:—whence it follows that avowed enemies are indispensable to
some men, if they are to attain to _their_ virtue, to their manliness,
to their cheerfulness.


                                  170.

_With the Multitude._—He has hitherto gone with the multitude and is its
panegyrist; but one day he will be its opponent! For he follows it in
the belief that his laziness will find its advantage thereby; he has not
yet learned that the multitude is not lazy enough for him! that it
always presses forward! that it does not allow any one to stand
still!—And he likes so well to stand still!


                                  171.

_Fame._—When the gratitude of many to one casts aside all shame, then
fame originates.


                                  172.

_The Perverter of Taste._—A: "You are a perverter of taste—they say so
everywhere!" B: "Certainly! I pervert every one's taste for his
party:—no party forgives me for that."


                                  173.

_To be Profound and to Appear Profound._—He who knows that he is
profound strives for clearness; he who would like to appear profound to
the multitude strives for obscurity. The multitude thinks everything
profound of which it cannot see the bottom; it is so timid and goes so
unwillingly into the water.


                                  174.

_Apart._—Parliamentarism, that is to say, the public permission to
choose between five main political opinions, insinuates itself into the
favour of the numerous class who would fain _appear_ independent and
individual, and like to fight for their opinions. After all, however, it
is a matter of indifference whether one opinion is imposed upon the
herd, or five opinions are permitted to it.—He who diverges from the
five public opinions and goes apart, has always the whole herd against
him.


                                  175.

_Concerning Eloquence._—What has hitherto had the most convincing
eloquence? The rolling of the drum: and as long as kings have this at
their command, they will always be the best orators and popular leaders.


                                  176.

_Compassion._—The poor, ruling princes! All their rights now change
unexpectedly into claims, and all these claims immediately sound like
pretensions! And if they but say "we," or "my people," wicked old Europe
begins laughing. Verily, a chief-master-of-ceremonies of the modern
world would make little ceremony with them; perhaps he would decree that
"_les souverains rangent aux parvenus_."


                                  177.

_On "Educational Matters."_—In Germany an important educational means is
lacking for higher men; namely, the laughter of higher men; these men do
not laugh in Germany.


                                  178.

_For Moral Enlightenment._—The Germans must be talked out of their
Mephistopheles—and out of their Faust also. These are two moral
prejudices against the value of knowledge.


                                  179.

_Thoughts._—Thoughts are the shadows of our sentiments—always, however,
obscurer, emptier, and simpler.


                                  180.

_The Good Time for Free Spirits._—Free Spirits take liberties even with
regard to Science—and meanwhile they are allowed to do so,—while the
Church still remains!—In so far they have now their good time.


                                  181.

_Following and Leading._—A: "Of the two, the one will always follow, the
other will always lead, whatever be the course of their destiny. _And
yet_ the former is superior to the other in virtue and intellect." B:
"And yet? And yet? That is spoken for the others; not for me, not for
us!—_Fit secundum regulam._"


                                  182.

_In Solitude._—When one lives alone one does not speak too loudly, and
one does not write too loudly either, for one fears the hollow
reverberation—the criticism of the nymph Echo.—And all voices sound
differently in solitude!


                                  183.

_The Music of the Best Future._—The first musician for me would be he
who knew only the sorrow of the profoundest happiness, and no other
sorrow: there has not hitherto been such a musician.


                                  184.

_Justice._—Better allow oneself to be robbed than have scarecrows around
one—that is my taste. And under all circumstances it is just a matter of
taste—and nothing more!


                                  185.

_Poor._—He is now poor, but not because everything has been taken from
him, but because he has thrown everything away:—what does he care? He is
accustomed to find new things.—It is the poor who misunderstand his
voluntary poverty.


                                  186.

_Bad Conscience._—All that he now does is excellent and proper—and yet
he has a bad conscience with it all. For the exceptional is his task.


                                  187.

_Offensiveness in Expression._—This artist offends me by the way in
which he expresses his ideas, his very excellent ideas: so diffusely and
forcibly, and with such gross rhetorical artifices, as if he were
speaking to the mob. We feel always as if "in bad company" when devoting
some time to his art.


                                  188.

_Work._—How close work and the workers now stand even to the most
leisurely of us! The royal courtesy in the words: "We are all workers,"
would have been a cynicism and an indecency even under Louis XIV.


                                  189.

_The Thinker._—He is a thinker: that is to say, he knows how to take
things more simply than they are.


                                  190.

_Against Eulogisers._—A: "One is only praised by one's equals!" B: "Yes!
And he who praises you says: 'You are my equal!'"


                                  191.

_Against many a Vindication._—The most perfidious manner of injuring a
cause is to vindicate it intentionally with fallacious arguments.


                                  192.

_The Good-natured._—What is it that distinguishes the good-natured,
whose countenances beam kindness, from other people? They feel quite at
ease in presence of a new person, and are quickly enamoured of him; they
therefore wish him well; their first opinion is: "He pleases me." With
them there follow in succession the wish to appropriate (they make
little scruple about the person's worth), rapid appropriation, joy in
the possession, and actions in favour of the person possessed.


                                  193.

_Kant's Joke._—Kant tried to prove, in a way that dismayed "everybody,"
that "everybody" was in the right:—that was his secret joke. He wrote
against the learned, in favour of popular prejudice; he wrote, however,
for the learned and not for the people.


                                  194.

_The "Open-hearted" Man._—That man acts probably always from concealed
motives; for he has always communicable motives on his tongue, and
almost in his open hand.


                                  195.

_Laughable!_—See! See! He runs _away_ from men—: they follow him,
however, because he runs _before_ them,—they are such a gregarious lot!


                                  196.

_The Limits of our Sense of Hearing._—We hear only the questions to
which we are capable of finding an answer.


                                  197.

_Caution therefore!_—There is nothing we are fonder of communicating to
others than the seal of secrecy—together with what is under it.


                                  198.

_Vexation of the Proud Man._—The proud man is vexed even with those who
help him forward: he looks angrily at his carriage-horses!


                                  199.

_Liberality._—Liberality is often only a form of timidity in the rich.


                                  200.

_Laughing._—To laugh means to love mischief, but with a good conscience.


                                  201.

_In Applause._—In applause there is always some kind of noise: even in
self-applause.


                                  202.

_A Spendthrift._—He has not yet the poverty of the rich man who has
counted all his treasure,—he squanders his spirit with the
irrationalness of the spendthrift Nature.


                                  203.

_Hic niger est._—Usually he has no thoughts,—but in exceptional cases
bad thoughts come to him.


                                  204.

_Beggars and Courtesy._—"One is not discourteous when one knocks at a
door with a stone when the bell-pull is awanting"—so think all beggars
and necessitous persons, but no one thinks they are in the right.


                                  205.

_Need._—Need is supposed to be the cause of things; but in truth it is
often only the effect of the things themselves.


                                  206.

_During the Rain._—It rains, and I think of the poor people who now
crowd together with their many cares, which they are unaccustomed to
conceal; all of them, therefore, ready and anxious to give pain to one
another, and thus provide themselves with a pitiable kind of comfort,
even in bad weather. This, this only, is the poverty of the poor!


                                  207.

_The Envious Man._—That is an envious man—it is not desirable that he
should have children; he would be envious of them, because he can no
longer be a child.


                                  208.

_A Great Man!_—Because a person is "a great man," we are not authorised
to infer that he is a man. Perhaps he is only a boy, or a chameleon of
all ages, or a bewitched girl.


                                  209.

_A Mode of Asking for Reasons._—There is a mode of asking for our
reasons which not only makes us forget our best reasons, but also
arouses in us a spite and repugnance against reason generally:—a very
stupefying mode of questioning, and properly an artifice of tyrannical
men!


                                  210.

_Moderation in Diligence._—One must not be anxious to surpass the
diligence of one's father—that would make one ill.


                                  211.

_Secret Enemies._—To be able to keep a secret enemy—that is a luxury
which the morality even of the highest-minded persons can rarely afford.


                                  212.

_Not Letting oneself be Deluded._—His spirit has bad manners, it is
hasty and always stutters with impatience; so that one would hardly
suspect the deep breathing and the large chest of the soul in which it
resides.


                                  213.

_The Way to Happiness._—A sage asked of a fool the way to happiness. The
fool answered without delay, like one who had been asked the way to the
next town: "Admire yourself, and live on the street!" "Hold," cried the
sage, "you require too much; it suffices to admire oneself!" The fool
replied: "But how can one constantly admire without constantly
despising?"


                                  214.

_Faith Saves._—Virtue gives happiness and a state of blessedness only to
those who have a strong faith in their virtue:—not, however, to the more
refined souls whose virtue consists of a profound distrust of themselves
and of all virtue. After all, therefore, it is "faith that saves" here
also!—and be it well observed, _not_ virtue!


                                  215.

_The Ideal and the Material._—You have a noble ideal before your eyes:
but are you also such a noble stone that such a divine image could be
formed out of you? And without that—is not all your labour barbaric
sculpturing? A blasphemy of your ideal!


                                  216.

_Danger in the Voice._—With a very loud voice a person is almost
incapable of reflecting on subtle matters.


                                  217.

_Cause and Effect._—Before the effect one believes in other causes than
after the effect.


                                  218.

_My Antipathy._—I do not like those people who, in order to produce an
effect, have to burst like bombs, and in whose neighbourhood one is
always in danger of suddenly losing one's hearing—or even something
more.


                                  219.

_The Object of Punishment._—The object of punishment is to improve him
_who punishes_,—that is the ultimate appeal of those who justify
punishment.


                                  220.

_Sacrifice._—The victims think otherwise than the spectators about
sacrifice and sacrificing: but they have never been allowed to express
their opinion.


                                  221.

_Consideration._—Fathers and sons are much more considerate of one
another than mothers and daughters.


                                  222.

_Poet and Liar._—The poet sees in the liar his foster-brother whose milk
he has drunk up; the latter has thus remained wretched, and has not even
attained to a good conscience.


                                  223.

_Vicariousness of the Senses._—"We have also eyes in order to hear with
them,"—said an old confessor who had grown deaf; "and among the blind he
that has the longest ears is king."


                                  224.

_Animal Criticism._—I fear the animals regard man as a being like
themselves, very seriously endangered by a loss of sound animal
understanding;—they regard him perhaps as the absurd animal, the
laughing animal, the crying animal, the unfortunate animal.


                                  225.

_The Natural._—"Evil has always had the great effect! And Nature is
evil! Let us therefore be natural!"—so reason secretly the great
aspirants after effect, who are too often counted among great men.


                                  226.

_The Distrustful and their Style._—We say the strongest things simply,
provided people are about us who believe in our strength:—such an
environment educates to "simplicity of style." The distrustful, on the
other hand, speak emphatically; they make things emphatic.


                                  227.

_Fallacy, Fallacy._—He cannot rule himself; therefore that woman
concludes that it will be easy to rule him, and throws out her lines to
catch him;—the poor creature, who in a short time will be his slave.


                                  228.

_Against Mediators._—He who attempts to mediate between two decided
thinkers is rightly called mediocre: he has not an eye for seeing the
unique; similarising and equalising are signs of weak eyes.


                                  229.

_Obstinacy and Loyalty._—Out of obstinacy he holds fast to a cause of
which the questionableness has become obvious,—he calls that, however,
his "loyalty."


                                  230.

_Lack of Reserve._—His whole nature fails to _convince_—that results
from the fact that he has never been reticent about a good action he has
performed.


                                  231.

_The "Plodders."_—Persons slow of apprehension think that slowness forms
part of knowledge.


                                  232.

_Dreaming._—Either one does not dream at all, or one dreams in an
interesting manner. One must learn to be awake in the same
fashion:—either not at all, or in an interesting manner.


                                  233.

_The most Dangerous Point of View._—What I now do, or neglect to do, is
as important _for all that is to come_, as the greatest event of the
past: in this immense perspective of effects all actions are equally
great and small.


                                  234.

_Consolatory Words of a Musician._—"Your life does not sound into
people's ears: for them you live a dumb life, and all refinements of
melody, all fond resolutions in following or leading the way, are
concealed from them. To be sure you do not parade the thoroughfares with
regimental music,—but these good people have no right to say on that
account that your life is lacking in music. He that hath ears let him
hear."


                                  235.

_Spirit and Character._—Many a one attains his full height of character,
but his spirit is not adapted to the elevation,—and many a one
reversely.


                                  236.

_To Move the Multitude._—Is it not necessary for him who wants to move
the multitude to give a stage representation of himself? Has he not
first to translate himself into the grotesquely obvious, and then _set
forth_ his whole personality and cause in that vulgarised and simplified
fashion!


                                  237.

_The Polite Man._—"He is so polite!"—Yes, he has always a sop for
Cerberus with him, and is so timid that he takes everybody for Cerberus,
even you and me,—that is his "politeness."


                                  238.

_Without Envy._—He is wholly without envy, but there is no merit
therein: for he wants to conquer a land which no one has yet possessed
and hardly any one has even seen.


                                  239.

_The Joyless Person._—A single joyless person is enough to make constant
displeasure and a clouded heaven in a household; and it is only by a
miracle that such a person is lacking!—Happiness is not nearly such a
contagious disease;—how is that!


                                  240.

_On the Sea-Shore._—I would not build myself a house (it is an element
of my happiness not to be a house-owner!). If I had to do so, however, I
should build it, like many of the Romans, right into the sea,—I should
like to have some secrets in common with that beautiful monster.


                                  241.

_Work and Artist._—This artist is ambitious and nothing more;
ultimately, however, his work is only a magnifying glass, which he
offers to every one who looks in his direction.


                                  242.

_Suum cuique._—However great be my greed of knowledge, I cannot
appropriate aught of things but what already belongs to me,—the property
of others still remains in the things. How is it possible for a man to
be a thief or a robber!


                                  243.

_Origin of "Good" and "Bad."_—He only will devise an improvement who can
feel that "this is not good."


                                  244.

_Thoughts and Words._—Even our thoughts we are unable to render
completely in words.


                                  245.

_Praise in Choice._—The artist chooses his subjects; that is his mode of
praising.


                                  246.

_Mathematics._—We want to carry the refinement and rigour of mathematics
into all the sciences, as far as it is in any way possible, not in the
belief that we shall apprehend things in this way, but in order thereby
to _assert_ our human relation to things. Mathematics is only a means to
general and ultimate human knowledge.


                                  247.

_Habits._—All habits make our hand wittier and our wit unhandier.


                                  248.

_Books._—Of what account is a book that never carries us away beyond all
books!


                                  249.

_The Sigh of the Seeker of Knowledge._—"Oh, my covetousness! In this
soul there is no disinterestedness—but an all-desiring self, which, by
means of many individuals, would fain see as with _its own_ eyes, and
grasp as with _its own_ hands—a self bringing back even the entire past,
and wanting to lose nothing that could in any way belong to it! Oh, this
flame of my covetousness! Oh, that I were reincarnated in a hundred
individuals!"—He who does not know this sigh by experience, does not
know the passion of the seeker of knowledge either.


                                  250.

_Guilt._—Although the most intelligent judges of the witches, and even
the witches themselves, were convinced of the guilt of witchcraft, the
guilt, nevertheless, was not there. So it is with all guilt.


                                  251.

_Misunderstood Sufferers._—Great natures suffer otherwise than their
worshippers imagine; they suffer most severely from the ignoble, petty
emotions of certain evil moments; in short, from doubt of their own
greatness;—not however from the sacrifices and martyrdoms which their
tasks require of them. As long as Prometheus sympathises with men and
sacrifices himself for them, he is happy and proud in himself; but on
becoming envious of Zeus and of the homage which mortals pay him—then
Prometheus suffers!


                                  252.

_Better to be in Debt._—"Better to remain in debt than to pay with money
which does not bear our stamp!"—that is what our sovereignty prefers.


                                  253.

_Always at Home._—One day we attain our _goal_—and then refer with pride
to the long journeys we have made to reach it. In truth, we did not
notice that we travelled. We got into the habit of thinking that we were
_at home_ in every place.


                                  254.

_Against Embarrassment._—He who is always thoroughly occupied is rid of
all embarrassment.


                                  255.

_Imitators._—A: "What? You don't want to have imitators?" B: "I don't
want people to do anything _after_ me; I want every one to do something
_before_ himself (as a pattern to himself)—just as _I_ do." A:
"Consequently—?"


                                  256.

_Skinniness._—All profound men have their happiness in imitating the
flying-fish for once, and playing on the crests of the waves; they think
that what is best of all in things is their surface: their
skinniness—_sit venia verbo_.


                                  257.

_From Experience._—A person often does not know how rich he is, until he
learns from experience what rich men even play the thief on him.


                                  258.

_The Deniers of Chance._—No conqueror believes in chance.


                                  259.

_From Paradise._—"Good and Evil are God's prejudices"—said the serpent.


                                  260.

_One times One._—One only is always in the wrong, but with two truth
begins.—One only cannot prove himself right; but two are already beyond
refutation.


                                  261.

_Originality._—What is originality? To _see_ something that does not yet
bear a name, that cannot yet be named, although it is before everybody's
eyes. As people are usually constituted, it is the name that first makes
a thing generally visible to them.—Original persons have also for the
most part been the namers of things.


                                  262.

_Sub specie aeterni._—A: "You withdraw faster and faster from the
living; they will soon strike you out of their lists!"—B: "It is the
only way to participate in the privilege of the dead." A: "In what
privilege?"—B: "No longer having to die."


                                  263.

_Without Vanity._—When we love we want our defects to remain
concealed,—not out of vanity, but lest the person loved should suffer
therefrom. Indeed, the lover would like to appear as a God,—and not out
of vanity either.


                                  264.

_What we Do._—What we do is never understood, but only praised and
blamed.


                                  265.

_Ultimate Scepticism._—But what after all are man's truths?—They are his
_irrefutable_ errors.


                                  266.

_Where Cruelty is Necessary._—He who is great is cruel to his
second-rate virtues and judgments.


                                  267.

_With a high Aim._—With a high aim a person is superior even to justice,
and not only to his deeds and his judges.


                                  268.

_What makes Heroic?_—To face simultaneously one's greatest suffering and
one's highest hope.


                                  269.

_What dost thou Believe in?_—In this: That the weights of all things
must be determined anew.


                                  270.

_What Saith thy Conscience?_—"Thou shalt become what thou art."


                                  271.

_Where are thy Greatest Dangers?_—In pity.


                                  272.

_What dost thou Love in others?_—My hopes.


                                  273.

_Whom dost thou call Bad?_—Him who always wants to put others to shame.


                                  274.

_What dost thou think most humane?_—To spare a person shame.


                                  275.

_What is the Seal of Liberty Attained?_—To be no longer ashamed of
oneself.

-----

Footnote 9:

  This means that true love does not look for reciprocity.—TR.




                              BOOK FOURTH

                           SANCTUS JANUARIUS


            Thou who with cleaving fiery lances
              The stream of my soul from its ice dost free,
            Till with a rush and a roar it advances
              To enter with glorious hoping the sea:
            Brighter to see and purer ever,
              Free in the bonds of thy sweet constraint,—
            So it praises thy wondrous endeavour,
              January, thou beauteous saint!

_Genoa_, January 1882.


                                  276.

_For the New Year._—I still live, I still think; I must still live, for
I must still think. _Sum, ergo cogito: cogito, ergo sum._ To-day
everyone takes the liberty of expressing his wish and his favourite
thought: well, I also mean to tell what I have wished for myself to-day,
and what thought first crossed my mind this year,—a thought which ought
to be the basis, the pledge and the sweetening of all my future life! I
want more and more to perceive the necessary characters in things as the
beautiful:—I shall thus be one of those who beautify things. _Amor
fati_: let that henceforth be my love! I do not want to wage war with
the ugly. I do not want to accuse, I do not want even to accuse the
accusers. _Looking aside_, let that be my sole negation! And all in all,
to sum up: I wish to be at any time hereafter only a yea-sayer!


                                  277.

_Personal Providence._—There is a certain climax in life, at which,
notwithstanding all our freedom, and however much we may have denied all
directing reason and goodness in the beautiful chaos of existence, we
are once more in great danger of intellectual bondage, and have to face
our hardest test. For now the thought of a personal Providence first
presents itself before us with its most persuasive force, and has the
best of advocates, apparentness, in its favour, now when it is obvious
that all and everything that happens to us always _turns out for the
best_. The life of every day and of every hour seems to be anxious for
nothing else but always to prove this proposition anew; let it be what
it will, bad or good weather, the loss of a friend, a sickness, a
calumny, the non-receipt of a letter, the spraining of one's foot, a
glance into a shop-window, a counter-argument, the opening of a book, a
dream, a deception:—it shows itself immediately, or very soon afterwards
as something "not permitted to be absent,"—it is full of profound
significance and utility precisely _for us_! Is there a more dangerous
temptation to rid ourselves of the belief in the Gods of Epicurus, those
careless, unknown Gods, and believe in some anxious and mean Divinity,
who knows personally every little hair on our heads, and feels no
disgust in rendering the most wretched services? Well—I mean in spite of
all this! we want to leave the Gods alone (and the serviceable genii
likewise), and wish to content ourselves with the assumption that our
own practical and theoretical skilfulness in explaining and suitably
arranging events has now reached its highest point. We do not want
either to think too highly of this dexterity of our wisdom, when the
wonderful harmony which results from playing on our instrument sometimes
surprises us too much: a harmony which sounds too well for us to dare to
ascribe it to ourselves. In fact, now and then there is one who plays
_with_ us—beloved Chance: he leads our hand occasionally, and even the
all-wisest Providence could not devise any finer music than that of
which our foolish hand is then capable.


                                  278.

_The Thought of Death._—It gives me a melancholy happiness to live in
the midst of this confusion of streets, of necessities, of voices: how
much enjoyment, impatience and desire, how much thirsty life and
drunkenness of life comes to light here every moment! And yet it will
soon be so still for all these shouting, lively, life-loving people! How
everyone's shadow, his gloomy travelling-companion stands behind him! It
is always as in the last moment before the departure of an
emigrant-ship: people have more than ever to say to one another, the
hour presses, the ocean with its lonely silence waits impatiently behind
all the noise—so greedy, so certain of its prey! And all, all, suppose
that the past has been nothing, or a small matter, that the near future
is everything: hence this haste, this crying, this self-deafening and
self-overreaching! Everyone wants to be foremost in this future,—and yet
death and the stillness of death are the only things certain and common
to all in this future! How strange that this sole thing that is certain
and common to all, exercises almost no influence on men, and that they
are the _furthest_ from regarding themselves as the brotherhood of
death! It makes me happy to see that men do not want to think at all of
the idea of death! I would fain do something to make the idea of life
even a hundred times _more worthy of their attention_.


                                  279.

_Stellar Friendship._—We were friends, and have become strangers to each
other. But this is as it ought to be, and we do not want either to
conceal or obscure the fact, as if we had to be ashamed of it. We are
two ships, each of which has its goal and its course; we may, to be
sure, cross one another in our paths, and celebrate a feast together as
we did before,—and then the gallant ships lay quietly in one harbour,
and in one sunshine, so that it might have been thought they were
already at their goal, and that they had had one goal. But then the
almighty strength of our tasks forced us apart once more into different
seas and into different zones, and perhaps we shall never see one
another again,—or perhaps we may see one another, but not know one
another again; the different seas and suns have altered us! That we had
to become strangers to one another is the law to which we are _subject_:
just by that shall we become more sacred to one another! Just by that
shall the thought of our former friendship become holier! There is
probably some immense, invisible curve and stellar orbit in which our
courses and goals, so widely different, may be _comprehended_ as small
stages of the way,—let us raise ourselves to this thought! But our life
is too short, and our power of vision too limited for us to be more than
friends in the sense of that sublime possibility.—And so we will
_believe_ in our stellar friendship, though we should have to be
terrestrial enemies to one another.


                                  280.

_Architecture for Thinkers._—An insight is needed (and that probably
very soon) as to what is specially lacking in our great cities—namely,
quiet, spacious, and widely extended places for reflection, places with
long, lofty colonnades for bad weather, or for too sunny days, where no
noise of wagons or of shouters would penetrate, and where a more refined
propriety would prohibit loud praying even to the priest: buildings and
situations which as a whole would express the sublimity of
self-communion and seclusion from the world. The time is past when the
Church possessed the monopoly of reflection, when the _vita
contemplativa_ had always in the first place to be the _vita religiosa_:
and everything that the Church has built expresses this thought. I know
not how we could content ourselves with their structures, even if they
should be divested of their ecclesiastical purposes: these structures
speak a far too pathetic and too biassed speech, as houses of God and
places of splendour for supernatural intercourse, for us godless ones to
be able to think _our thoughts_ in them. We want to have _ourselves_
translated into stone and plant, we want to go for a walk in _ourselves_
when we wander in these halls and gardens.


                                  281.

_Knowing how to Find the End._—Masters of the first rank are recognised
by knowing in a perfect manner how to find the end, in the whole as well
as in the part; be it the end of a melody or of a thought, be it the
fifth act of a tragedy or of a state affair. The masters of the second
degree always become restless towards the end, and seldom dip down into
the sea with such proud, quiet equilibrium as, for example, the
mountain-ridge at _Porto fino_—where the Bay of Genoa sings its melody
to an end.


                                  282.

_The Gait._—There are mannerisms of the intellect by which even great
minds betray that they originate from the populace, or from the
semi-populace:—it is principally the gait and step of their thoughts
which betray them; they cannot _walk_. It was thus that even Napoleon,
to his profound chagrin, could not walk "legitimately" and in princely
fashion on occasions when it was necessary to do so properly, as in
great coronation processions and on similar occasions: even there he was
always just the leader of a column—proud and brusque at the same time,
and very self-conscious of it all.—It is something laughable to see
those writers who make the folding robes of their periods rustle around
them: they want to cover their _feet_.


                                  283.

_Pioneers._—I greet all the signs indicating that a more manly and
warlike age is commencing, which will, above all, bring heroism again
into honour! For it has to prepare the way for a yet higher age, and
gather the force which the latter will one day require,—the age which
will carry heroism into knowledge, and _wage war_ for the sake of ideas
and their consequences. For that end many brave pioneers are now needed,
who, however, cannot originate out of nothing,—and just as little out of
the sand and slime of present-day civilisation and the culture of great
cities: men silent, solitary and resolute, who know how to be content
and persistent in invisible activity: men who with innate disposition
seek in all things that which is _to be overcome_ in them: men to whom
cheerfulness, patience, simplicity, and contempt of the great vanities
belong just as much as do magnanimity in victory and indulgence to the
trivial vanities of all the vanquished: men with an acute and
independent judgment regarding all victors, and concerning the part
which chance has played in the winning of victory and fame: men with
their own holidays, their own work-days, and their own periods of
mourning; accustomed to command with perfect assurance, and equally
ready, if need be, to obey, proud in the one case as in the other,
equally serving their own interests: men more imperilled, more
productive, more happy! For believe me!—the secret of realising the
largest productivity and the greatest enjoyment of existence is _to live
in danger_! Build your cities on the slope of Vesuvius! Send your ships
into unexplored seas! Live in war with your equals and with yourselves!
Be robbers and spoilers, ye knowing ones, as long as ye cannot be rulers
and possessor! The time will soon pass when you can be satisfied to live
like timorous deer concealed in the forests. Knowledge will finally
stretch out her hand for that which belongs to her:—she means to _rule_
and _possess_, and you with her!


                                  284.

_Belief in Oneself._—In general, few men have belief in themselves:—and
of those few some are endowed with it as a useful blindness or partial
obscuration of intellect (what would they perceive if they could see _to
the bottom of themselves_!). The others must first acquire the belief
for themselves: everything good, clever, or great that they do, is first
of all an argument against the sceptic that dwells in them: the question
is how to convince or persuade _this sceptic_, and for that purpose
genius almost is needed. They are signally dissatisfied with themselves.


                                  285.

_Excelsior!_—"Thou wilt never more pray, never more worship, never more
repose in infinite trust—thou refusest to stand still and dismiss thy
thoughts before an ultimate wisdom, an ultimate virtue, an ultimate
power,—thou hast no constant guardian and friend in thy seven
solitudes—thou livest without the outlook on a mountain that has snow on
its head and fire in its heart—there is no longer any requiter for thee,
nor any amender with his finishing touch—there is no longer any reason
in that which happens, or any love in that which will happen to
thee—there is no longer any resting-place for thy weary heart, where it
has only to find and no longer to seek, thou art opposed to any kind of
ultimate peace, thou desirest the eternal recurrence of war and
peace:—man of renunciation, wilt thou renounce in all these things? Who
will give thee the strength to do so? No one has yet had this
strength!"—There is a lake which one day refused to flow away, and threw
up a dam at the place where it had hitherto flowed away: since then this
lake has always risen higher and higher. Perhaps the very renunciation
will also furnish us with the strength with which the renunciation
itself can be borne; perhaps man will ever rise higher and higher from
that point onward, when he no longer _flows out_ into a God.


                                  286.

_A Digression._—Here are hopes; but what will you see and hear of them,
if you have not experienced glance and glow and dawn of day in your own
souls? I can only suggest—I cannot do more! To move the stones, to make
animals men—would you have me do that? Alas, if you are yet stones and
animals, seek first your Orpheus!


                                  287.

_Love of Blindness._—"My thoughts," said the wanderer to his shadow,
"ought to show me where I stand, but they should not betray to me
_whither I go_. I love ignorance of the future, and do not want to come
to grief by impatience and anticipatory tasting of promised things."


                                  288.

_Lofty Moods._—It seems to me that most men do not believe in lofty
moods, unless it be for the moment, or at the most for a quarter of an
hour,—except the few who know by experience a longer duration of high
feeling. But to be absolutely a man with a single lofty feeling, the
incarnation of a single lofty mood—that has hitherto been only a dream
and an enchanting possibility: history does not yet give us any
trustworthy example of it. Nevertheless it could some day produce such
men also—when a multitude of favourable conditions have been created and
established, which at present even the happiest chance is unable to
throw together. Perhaps that very state which has hitherto entered into
our soul as an exception, felt with horror now and then, may be the
usual condition of those future souls: a continuous movement between
high and low, and the feeling of high and low, a constant state of
mounting as on steps, and at the same time reposing as on clouds.


                                  289.

_Aboard Ship!_—When one considers how a full philosophical
justification of his mode of living and thinking operates upon every
individual—namely, as a warming, blessing, and fructifying sun,
specially shining on him; how it makes him independent of praise and
blame, self-sufficient, rich and generous in the bestowal of happiness
and kindness; how it unceasingly transforms the evil to the good,
brings all the energies to bloom and maturity, and altogether hinders
the growth of the greater and lesser weeds of chagrin and
discontent:—one at last cries out importunately: Oh, that many such
new suns were created! The evil man, also, the unfortunate man, and
the exceptional man, shall each have his philosophy, his rights, and
his sunshine! It is not sympathy with them that is necessary!—we must
unlearn this arrogant fancy, notwithstanding that humanity has so long
learned it and used it exclusively—we have not to set up any
confessor, exorcist, or pardoner for them! It is a new _justice_,
however, that is necessary! And a new solution! And new philosophers!
The moral earth also is round! The moral earth also has its antipodes!
The antipodes also have their right to exist! there is still another
world to discover—and more than one! Aboard ship! ye philosophers!


                                  290.

_One Thing is Needful._—To "give style" to one's character—that is a
grand and a rare art! He who surveys all that his nature presents in its
strength and in its weakness, and then fashions it into an ingenious
plan, until everything appears artistic and rational, and even the
weaknesses enchant the eye—exercises that admirable art. Here there has
been a great amount of second nature added, there a portion of first
nature has been taken away:—in both cases with long exercise and daily
labour at the task. Here the ugly, which does not permit of being taken
away, has been concealed, there it has been re-interpreted into the
sublime. Much of the vague, which refuses to take form, has been
reserved and utilised for the perspectives:—it is meant to give a hint
of the remote and immeasurable. In the end, when the work has been
completed, it is revealed how it was the constraint of the same taste
that organised and fashioned it in whole or in part: whether the taste
was good or bad is of less importance than one thinks,—it is sufficient
that it was _a taste_!—It will be the strong imperious natures which
experience their most refined joy in such constraint, in such
confinement and perfection under their own law; the passion of their
violent volition lessens at the sight of all disciplined nature, all
conquered and ministering nature: even when they have palaces to build
and gardens to lay out, it is not to their taste to allow nature to be
free.—It is the reverse with weak characters who have not power over
themselves, and _hate_ the restriction of style: they feel that if this
repugnant constraint were laid upon them, they would necessarily become
_vulgarised_ under it: they become slaves as soon as they serve, they
hate service. Such intellects—they may be intellects of the first
rank—are always concerned with fashioning or interpreting themselves and
their surroundings as _free_ nature—wild, arbitrary, fantastic, confused
and surprising: and it is well for them to do so, because only in this
manner can they please themselves! For one thing is needful: namely,
that man should _attain to_ satisfaction with himself—be it but through
this or that fable and artifice: it is only then that man's aspect is at
all endurable! He who is dissatisfied with himself is ever ready to
avenge himself on that account: we others will be his victims, if only
in having always to endure his ugly aspect. For the aspect of the ugly
makes one mean and sad.


                                  291.

_Genoa._—I have looked upon this city, its villas and pleasure-grounds
and the wide circuit of its inhabited heights and slopes, for a
considerable time: in the end I must say that I see _countenances_ out
of past generations,—this district is strewn with the images of bold and
autocratic men. They have _lived_ and have wanted to live on—they say so
with their houses, built and decorated for centuries, and not for the
passing hour: they were well disposed to life, however ill-disposed they
may often have been towards themselves. I always see the builder, how he
casts his eye on all that is built around him far and near, and likewise
on the city, the sea, and the chain of mountains; how he expresses power
and conquest in his gaze: all this he wishes to fit into _his_ plan, and
in the end make it his _property_, by its becoming a portion of the
same. The whole district is overgrown with this superb, insatiable
egoism of the desire to possess and exploit; and as these men when
abroad recognised no frontiers, and in their thirst for the new placed a
new world beside the old, so also at home everyone rose up against
everyone else, and devised some mode of expressing his superiority, and
of placing between himself and his neighbour his personal
illimitableness. Everyone won for himself his home once more by
over-powering it with his architectural thoughts, and by transforming it
into a delightful sight for his race. When we consider the mode of
building cities in the north, the law and the general delight in
legality and obedience, impose upon us: we thereby divine the propensity
to equality and submission which must have ruled in those builders.
Here, however, on turning every corner you find a man by himself, who
knows the sea, knows adventure, and knows the Orient, a man who is
averse to law and to neighbour, as if it bored him to have to do with
them, a man who scans all that is already old and established, with
envious glances: with a wonderful craftiness of fantasy, he would like,
at least in thought, to establish all this anew, to lay his hand upon
it, and introduce his meaning into it—if only for the passing hour of a
sunny afternoon, when for once his insatiable and melancholy soul feels
satiety, and when only what is his own, and nothing strange, may show
itself to his eye.


                                  292.

_To the Preachers of Morality._—I do not mean to moralise, but to those
who do, I would give this advice: if you mean ultimately to deprive the
best things and the best conditions of all honour and worth, continue to
speak of them in the same way as heretofore! Put them at the head of
your morality, and speak from morning till night of the happiness of
virtue, of repose of soul, of righteousness, and of reward and
punishment in the nature of things: according as you go on in this
manner, all these good things will finally acquire a popularity and a
street-cry for themselves: but then all the gold on them will also be
worn off, and more besides: all the gold _in them_ will have changed
into lead. Truly, you understand the reverse art of alchemy, the
depreciating of the most valuable things! Try, just for once, another
recipe, in order not to realise as hitherto the opposite of what you
mean to attain: _deny_ those good things, withdraw from them the
applause of the populace and discourage the spread of them, make them
once more the concealed chastities of solitary souls, say that _morality
is something forbidden_! Perhaps you will thus win over for those things
the sort of men who are only of any account, I mean the _heroic_. But
then there must be something formidable in them, and not as hitherto
something disgusting! Might one not be inclined to say at present with
reference to morality what Master Eckardt says: "I pray God to deliver
me from God!"


                                  293.

_Our Atmosphere._—We know it well: to him who only casts a glance now
and then at science, as in taking a walk (in the manner of women, and
alas! also like many artists), the strictness in its service, its
inexorability in small matters as well as in great, its rapidity in
weighing, judging and condemning, produce something of a feeling of
giddiness and fright. It is especially terrifying to him that the
hardest is here demanded, that the best is done without the reward of
praise or distinction; it is rather as among soldiers—almost nothing but
blame and sharp reprimand _is heard_; for doing well prevails here as
the rule, doing ill as the exception; the rule, however, has, here as
everywhere, a silent tongue. It is the same with this "severity of
science" as with the manners and politeness of the best society: it
frightens the uninitiated. He, however, who is accustomed to it, does
not like to live anywhere but in this clear, transparent, powerful, and
highly electrified atmosphere, this _manly_ atmosphere. Anywhere else it
is not pure and airy enough for him: he suspects that _there_ his best
art would neither be properly advantageous to anyone else, nor a delight
to himself, that through misunderstandings half of his life would slip
through his fingers, that much foresight, much concealment, and
reticence would constantly be necessary,—nothing but great and useless
losses of power! In _this_ keen and clear element, however, he has his
entire power: here he can fly! Why should he again go down into those
muddy waters where he has to swim and wade and soil his wings!—No! There
it is too hard for us to live! we cannot help it that we are born for
the atmosphere, the pure atmosphere, we rivals of the ray of light; and
that we should like best to ride like it on the atoms of ether, not away
from the sun, but _towards the sun_! That, however, we cannot do:—so we
want to do the only thing that is in our power: namely, to bring light
to the earth, we want to be "the light of the earth!" And for that
purpose we have our wings and our swiftness and our severity, on that
account we are manly, and even terrible like the fire. Let those fear
us, who do not know how to warm and brighten themselves by our
influence!


                                  294.

_Against the Disparagers of Nature._—They are disagreeable to me, those
men in whom every natural inclination forthwith becomes a disease,
something disfiguring, or even disgraceful. _They_ have seduced us to
the opinion that the inclinations and impulses of men are evil; _they_
are the cause of our great injustice to our own nature, and to all
nature! There are enough of men who _may_ yield to their impulses
gracefully and carelessly: but they do not do so, for fear of that
imaginary "evil thing" in nature! _That is the cause_ why there is so
little nobility to be found among men: the indication of which will
always be to have no fear of oneself, to expect nothing disgraceful from
oneself, to fly without hesitation whithersoever we are impelled—we
free-born birds! Wherever we come, there will always be freedom and
sunshine around us.


                                  295.

_Short-lived Habits._—I love short-lived habits, and regard them as an
invaluable means for getting a knowledge of _many_ things and various
conditions, to the very bottom of their sweetness and bitterness; my
nature is altogether arranged for short-lived habits, even in the needs
of its bodily health, and in general, _as far as_ I can see, from the
lowest up to the highest matters. I always think that _this_ will at
last satisfy me permanently (the short-lived habit has also that
characteristic belief of passion, the belief in everlasting duration; I
am to be envied for having found it and recognised it), and then it
nourishes me at noon and at eve, and spreads a profound satisfaction
around me and in me, so that I have no longing for anything else, not
needing to compare, or despise, or hate. But one day the habit has had
its time: the good thing separates from me, not as something which then
inspires disgust in me—but peaceably and as though satisfied with me, as
I am with it; as if we had to be mutually thankful, and _thus_ shook
hands for farewell. And already the new habit waits at the door, and
similarly also my belief—indestructible fool and sage that I am!—that
this new habit will be the right one, the ultimate right one. So it is
with me as regards foods, thoughts, men, cities, poems, music,
doctrines, arrangements of the day, and modes of life.—On the other
hand, I hate _permanent_ habits, and feel as if a tyrant came into my
neighbourhood, and as if my life's breath _condensed_, when events take
such a form that permanent habits seem necessarily to grow out of them:
for example, through an official position, through constant
companionship with the same persons, through a settled abode, or through
a uniform state of health. Indeed, from the bottom of my soul I am
gratefully disposed to all my misery and sickness, and to whatever is
imperfect in me, because such things leave me a hundred back-doors
through which I can escape from permanent habits. The most unendurable
thing, to be sure, the really terrible thing, would be a life without
habits, a life which continually required improvisation:—that would be
my banishment and my Siberia.


                                  296.

_A Fixed Reputation._—A fixed reputation was formerly a matter of the
very greatest utility; and wherever society continues to be ruled by the
herd-instinct, it is still most suitable for every individual _to give_
to his character and business _the appearance_ of unalterableness,—even
when they are not so in reality. "One can rely on him, he remains the
same"—that is the praise which has most significance in all dangerous
conditions of society. Society feels with satisfaction that it has a
reliable _tool_ ready at all times in the virtue of this one, in the
ambition of that one, and in the reflection and passion of a third
one,—it honours this _tool-like nature_, this self-constancy, this
unchangeableness in opinions, efforts, and even in faults, with the
highest honours. Such a valuation, which prevails and has prevailed
everywhere simultaneously with the morality of custom, educates
"characters," and brings all changing, re-learning, and
self-transforming into _disrepute_. Be the advantage of this mode of
thinking ever so great otherwise, it is in any case the mode of judging
which is most injurious _to knowledge_: for precisely the good-will of
the knowing one ever to declare himself unhesitatingly as _opposed_ to
his former opinions, and in general to be distrustful of all that wants
to be fixed in him—is here condemned and brought into disrepute. The
disposition of the thinker, as incompatible with a "fixed reputation,"
is regarded as _dishonourable_, while the petrifaction of opinions has
all the honour to itself:—we have at present still to live under the
interdict of such rules! How difficult it is to live when one feels that
the judgment of many millenniums is around one and against one. It is
probable that for many millenniums knowledge was afflicted with a bad
conscience, and that there must have been much self-contempt and secret
misery in the history of the greatest intellects.


                                  297.

_Ability to Contradict._—Everyone knows at present that the ability to
endure contradiction is a high indication of culture. Some people even
know that the higher man courts opposition, and provokes it, so as to
get a cue to his hitherto unknown partiality. But the _ability_ to
contradict, the attainment of _good_ conscience in hostility to the
accustomed, the traditional and the hallowed,—that is more than both the
above-named abilities, and is the really great, new and astonishing
thing in our culture, the step of all steps of the emancipated
intellect: who knows that?—


                                  298.

_A Sigh._—I caught this notion on the way, and rapidly took the
readiest, poor words to hold it fast, so that it might not again fly
away. And now it has died in these dry words, and hangs and flaps about
in them—and I hardly know now, when I look upon it, how I could have had
such happiness when I caught this bird.


                                  299.

_What one should Learn from Artists._—What means have we for making
things beautiful, attractive, and desirable, when they are not so?—and I
suppose they are never so in themselves! We have here something to learn
from physicians, when, for example, they dilute what is bitter, or put
wine and sugar into their mixing-bowl; but we have still more to learn
from artists, who in fact, are continually concerned in devising such
inventions and artifices. To withdraw from things until one no longer
sees much of them, until one has even to see things into them, _in order
to see them at all_—or to view them from the side, and as in a frame—or
to place them so that they partly disguise themselves and only permit of
perspective views—or to look at them through coloured glasses, or in the
light of the sunset—or to furnish them with a surface or skin which is
not fully transparent: we should learn all that from artists, and
moreover be wiser than they. For this fine power of theirs usually
ceases with them where art ceases and life begins; _we_, however, want
to be the poets of our life, and first of all in the smallest and most
commonplace matters.


                                  300.

_Prelude to Science._—Do you believe then that the sciences would have
arisen and grown up if the sorcerers, alchemists, astrologers and
witches had not been their forerunners; those who, with their promisings
and foreshadowings, had first to create a thirst, a hunger, and a taste
for _hidden and forbidden_ powers? Yea, that infinitely more had to be
_promised_ than could ever be fulfilled, in order that something might
be fulfilled in the domain of knowledge? Perhaps the whole of
_religion_, also, may appear to some distant age as an exercise and a
prelude, in like manner as the prelude and preparation of science here
exhibit themselves, though _not_ at all practised and regarded as such.
Perhaps religion may have been the peculiar means for enabling
individual men to enjoy but once the entire self-satisfaction of a God
and all his self-redeeming power. Indeed!—one may ask—would man have
learned at all to get on the tracks of hunger and thirst for _himself_,
and to extract satiety and fullness out of _himself_, without that
religious schooling and preliminary history? Had Prometheus first to
_fancy_ that he had _stolen_ the light, and that he did penance for the
theft—in order finally to discover that he had created the light, _in
that he had longed for the light_, and that not only man, but also _God_
had been the work of _his_ hands and the clay in his hands? All mere
creations of the creator?—just as the illusion, the theft, the Caucasus,
the vulture, and the whole tragic Prometheia of all thinkers!


                                  301.

_Illusion of the Contemplative._—Higher men are distinguished from
lower, by seeing and hearing immensely more, and in a thoughtful
manner—and it is precisely this that distinguishes man from the animal,
and the higher animal from the lower. The world always becomes fuller
for him who grows up into the full stature of humanity; there are always
more interesting fishing-hooks, thrown out to him; the number of his
stimuli is continually on the increase, and similarly the varieties of
his pleasure and pain,—the higher man becomes always at the same time
happier and unhappier. An _illusion_, however, is his constant
accompaniment all along: he thinks he is placed as a _spectator_ and
_auditor_ before the great pantomime and concert of life; he calls his
nature a _contemplative nature_, and thereby overlooks the fact that he
himself is also a real creator, and continuous poet of life,—that he no
doubt differs greatly from the _actor_ in this drama, the so-called
practical man, but differs still more from a mere onlooker or spectator
_before_ the stage. There is certainly _vis contemplativa_, and
re-examination of his work peculiar to him as poet, but at the same
time, and first and foremost, he has the _vis creativa_, which the
practical man or doer _lacks_, whatever appearance and current belief
may say to the contrary. It is we, we who think and feel, that actually
and unceasingly _make_ something which does not yet exist: the whole
eternally increasing world of valuations, colours, weights,
perspectives, gradations, affirmations and negations. This composition
of ours is continually learnt, practised, and translated into flesh and
actuality, and even into the commonplace, by the so-called practical men
(our actors, as we have said). Whatever has _value_ in the present
world, has it not in itself, by its nature,—nature is always
worthless:—but a value was once given to it, bestowed upon it, and it
was _we_ who gave and bestowed! We only have created the world _which is
of any account to man_!—But it is precisely this knowledge that we lack,
and when we get hold of it for a moment we have forgotten it the next:
we misunderstand our highest power, we contemplative men, and estimate
ourselves at too low a rate,—we are neither as _proud nor as happy_ as
we might be.


                                  302.

_The Danger of the Happiest Ones._—To have fine senses and a fine taste;
to be accustomed to the select and the intellectually best as our proper
and readiest fare; to be blessed with a strong, bold, and daring soul;
to go through life with a quiet eye and a firm step, ever ready for the
worst as for a festival, and full of longing for undiscovered worlds and
seas, men and Gods; to listen to all joyous music, as if there, perhaps,
brave men, soldiers and seafarers, took a brief repose and enjoyment,
and in the profoundest pleasure of the moment were overcome with tears
and the whole purple melancholy of happiness: who would not like all
this to be _his_ possession, his condition! It was the _happiness of
Homer_! The condition of him who invented the Gods for the Greeks,—nay,
who invented _his_ Gods for himself! But let us not conceal the fact
that with this happiness of Homer in one's soul, one is more liable to
suffering than any other creature under the sun! And only at this price
do we purchase the most precious pearl that the waves of existence have
hitherto washed ashore! As its possessor one always becomes more
sensitive to pain, and at last too sensitive: a little displeasure and
loathing sufficed in the end to make Homer disgusted with life. He was
unable to solve a foolish little riddle which some young fishers
proposed to him! Yes, the little riddles are the dangers of the happiest
ones!—


                                  303.

_Two Happy Ones._—Certainly this man, notwithstanding his youth,
understands the _improvisation of life_, and astonishes even the acutest
observers. For it seems that he never makes a mistake, although he
constantly plays the most hazardous games. One is reminded of the
improvising masters of the musical art, to whom even the listeners would
fain ascribe a divine _infallibility_ of the hand, notwithstanding that
they now and then make a mistake, as every mortal is liable to do. But
they are skilled and inventive, and always ready in a moment to arrange
into the structure of the score the most accidental tone (where the jerk
of a finger or a humour brings it about), and to animate the accident
with a fine meaning and a soul.—Here is quite a different man:
everything that he intends and plans fails with him in the long run.
That on which he has now and again set his heart has already brought him
several times to the abyss, and to the very verge of ruin; and if he has
as yet got out of the scrape, it certainly has not been merely with a
"black eye." Do you think he is unhappy over it? He resolved long ago
not to regard his own wishes and plans as of so much importance. "If
this does not succeed with me,"—he says to himself, "perhaps that will
succeed; and on the whole I do not know but that I am under more
obligation to thank my failures than any of my successes. Am I made to
be headstrong, and to wear the bull's horns? That which constitutes the
worth and the sum of life _for me_, lies somewhere else; I know more of
life, because I have been so often on the point of losing it; and just
on that account I _have_ more of life than any of you!"


                                  304.

_In Doing we Leave Undone._—In the main all those moral systems are
distasteful to me which say: "Do not do this! Renounce! Overcome
thyself!" On the other hand I am favourable to those moral systems which
stimulate me to do something, and to do it again from morning till
evening, and dream of it at night, and think of nothing else but to do
it _well_, as well as it is possible for _me_ alone! From him who so
lives there fall off one after the other the things that do not pertain
to such a life: without hatred or antipathy, he sees _this_ take leave
of him to-day, and _that_ to-morrow, like the yellow leaves which every
livelier breeze strips from the tree: or he does not see at all that
they take leave of him, so firmly is his eye fixed upon his goal, and
generally forward, not sideways, backward, nor downward. "Our doing must
determine what we leave undone; in that we do, we leave undone"—so it
pleases me, so runs _my placitum_. But I do not mean to strive with open
eyes for my impoverishment; I do not like any of the negative virtues
whose very essence is negation and self-renunciation.


                                  305.

_Self-control._—Those moral teachers who first and foremost order man to
get himself into his own power, induce thereby a curious infirmity in
him,—namely, a constant sensitiveness with reference to all natural
strivings and inclinations, and as it were, a sort of itching. Whatever
may henceforth drive him, draw him, allure or impel him, whether
internally or externally—it always seems to this sensitive being, as if
his self-control were in danger: he is no longer at liberty to trust
himself to any instinct, to any free flight, but stands constantly with
defensive mien, armed against himself, with sharp distrustful eye, the
eternal watcher of his stronghold, to which office he has appointed
himself. Yes, he can be _great_ in that position! But how unendurable he
has now become to others, how difficult even for himself to bear, how
impoverished and cut off from the finest accidents of his soul! Yea,
even from all further _instruction_! For we must be able to lose
ourselves at times, if we want to learn something of what we have not in
ourselves.


                                  306.

_Stoic and Epicurean._—The Epicurean selects the situations, the
persons, and even the events which suit his extremely sensitive,
intellectual constitution; he renounces the rest—that is to say, by far
the greater part of experience—because it would be too strong and too
heavy fare for him. The Stoic, on the contrary, accustoms himself to
swallow stones and vermin, glass-splinters and scorpions, without
feeling any disgust: his stomach is meant to become indifferent in the
end to all that the accidents of existence cast into it:—he reminds one
of the Arabic sect of the Assaua, with which the French became
acquainted in Algiers; and like those insensible persons, he also likes
well to have an invited public at the exhibition of his insensibility,
the very thing the Epicurean willingly dispenses with:—he has of course
his "garden"! Stoicism may be quite advisable for men with whom fate
improvises, for those who live in violent times and are dependent on
abrupt and changeable individuals. He, however, who _anticipates_ that
fate will permit him to spin "a long thread," does well to make his
arrangements in Epicurean fashion; all men devoted to intellectual
labour have done it hitherto! For it would be a supreme loss to them to
forfeit their fine sensibility, and acquire the hard, stoical hide with
hedgehog prickles in exchange.


                                  307.

_In Favour of Criticism._—Something now appears to thee as an error
which thou formerly lovedst as a truth, or as a probability: thou
pushest it from thee and imaginest that thy reason has there gained a
victory. But perhaps that error was then, when thou wast still another
person—thou art always another person,—just as necessary to thee as all
thy present "truths," like a skin, as it were, which concealed and
veiled from thee much which thou still mayst not see. Thy new life, and
not thy reason, has slain that opinion for thee: _thou dost not require
it any longer_, and now it breaks down of its own accord, and the
irrationality crawls out of it as a worm into the light. When we make
use of criticism it is not something arbitrary and impersonal,—it is, at
least very often, a proof that there are lively, active forces in us,
which cast a skin. We deny, and must deny, because something in us
_wants_ to live and affirm itself, something which we perhaps do not as
yet know, do not as yet see!—So much in favour of criticism.


                                  308.

_The History of each Day._—What is it that constitutes the history of
each day for thee? Look at thy habits of which it consists: are they the
product of numberless little acts of cowardice and laziness, or of thy
bravery and inventive reason? Although the two cases are so different,
it is possible that men might bestow the same praise upon thee, and that
thou mightst also be equally useful to them in the one case as in the
other. But praise and utility and respectability may suffice for him
whose only desire is to have a good conscience,—not however for thee,
the "trier of the reins," who hast a _consciousness of the conscience_!


                                  309.

_Out of the Seventh Solitude._—One day the wanderer shut a door behind
him, stood still, and wept. Then he said: "Oh, this inclination and
impulse towards the true, the real, the non-apparent, the certain! How I
detest it! Why does this gloomy and passionate taskmaster follow just
_me_? I should like to rest, but it does not permit me to do so. Are
there not a host of things seducing me to tarry! Everywhere there are
gardens of Armida for me, and therefore there will always be fresh
separations and fresh bitterness of heart! I must set my foot forward,
my weary wounded foot: and because I feel I must do this, I often cast
grim glances back at the most beautiful things which could not detain
me—_because_ they could not detain me!"


                                  310.

_Will and Wave._—How eagerly this wave comes hither, as if it were a
question of its reaching something! How it creeps with frightful haste
into the innermost corners of the rocky cliff! It seems that it wants to
forestall some one; it seems that something is concealed there that has
value, high value.—And now it retreats somewhat more slowly, still quite
white with excitement,—is it disappointed? Has it found what it sought?
Does it merely pretend to be disappointed?—But already another wave
approaches, still more eager and wild than the first, and its soul also
seems to be full of secrets and of longing for treasure-seeking. Thus
live the waves,—thus live we who exercise will!—I do not say more.—But
what! Ye distrust me? Ye are angry at me, ye beautiful monsters? Do ye
fear that I will quite betray your secret? Well! Just be angry with me,
raise your green, dangerous bodies as high as ye can, make a wall
between me and the sun—as at present! Verily, there is now nothing more
left of the world save green twilight and green lightning-flashes. Do as
ye will, ye wanton creatures, roar with delight and wickedness—or dive
under again, pour your emeralds down into the depths, and cast your
endless white tresses of foam and spray over them—it is all the same to
me, for all is so well with you, and I am so pleased with you for it
all: how could I betray _you_! For—take this to heart!—I know you and
your secret, I know your race! You and I are indeed of one race! You and
I have indeed one secret!


                                  311.

_Broken Lights._—We are not always brave, and when we are weary, people
of our stamp are liable to lament occasionally in this wise:—"It is so
hard to cause pain to men—oh, that it should be necessary! What good is
it to live concealed, when we do not want to keep to ourselves that
which causes vexation? Would it not be more advisable to live in the
madding crowd, and compensate individuals for sins that are committed
and must be committed against mankind in general? Foolish with fools,
vain with the vain, enthusiastic with enthusiasts? Would that not be
reasonable when there is such an inordinate amount of divergence in the
main? When I hear of the malignity of others against me—is not my first
feeling that of satisfaction? It is well that it should be so!—I seem to
myself to say to them—I am so little in harmony with you, and have so
much truth on my side: see henceforth that ye be merry at my expense as
often as ye can! Here are my defects and mistakes, here are my
illusions, my bad taste, my confusion, my tears, my vanity, my owlish
concealment, my contradictions! Here you have something to laugh at!
Laugh then, and enjoy yourselves! I am not averse to the law and nature
of things, which is that defects and errors should give pleasure!—To be
sure there were once 'more glorious' times, when as soon as any one got
an idea, however moderately new it might be, he would think himself so
_indispensable_ as to go out into the street with it, and call to
everybody: 'Behold! the kingdom of heaven is at hand!'—I should not miss
myself, if I were a-wanting. We are none of us indispensable!"—As we
have said, however, we do not think thus when we are brave; we do not
think _about it_ at all.


                                  312.

_My Dog._—I have given a name to my suffering, and call it "dog,"—it is
just as faithful, just as importunate and shameless, just as
entertaining, just as wise, as any other dog—and I can domineer over it,
and vent my bad humour on it, as others do with their dogs, servants,
and wives.


                                  313.

_No Picture of a Martyr._—I will take my cue from Raphael, and not paint
any more martyr pictures. There are enough of sublime things without its
being necessary to seek sublimity where it is linked with cruelty;
moreover my ambition would not be gratified in the least if I aspired to
be a sublime executioner.


                                  314.

_New Domestic Animals._—I want to have my lion and my eagle about me,
that I may always have hints and premonitions concerning the amount of
my strength or weakness. Must I look down on them to-day, and be afraid
of them? And will the hour come once more when they will look up to me,
and tremble?—


                                  315.

_The Last Hour._—Storms are my danger. Shall I have my storm in which I
shall perish, just as Oliver Cromwell perished in his storm? Or shall I
go out as a light does, not first blown out by the wind, but grown tired
and weary of itself—a burnt-out light? Or finally, shall I blow myself
out, so as _not to burn out_!


                                  316.

_Prophetic Men._—Ye cannot divine how sorely prophetic men suffer: ye
think only that a fine "gift" has been given to them, and would fain
have it yourselves,—but I will express my meaning by a simile. How much
may not the animals suffer from the electricity of the atmosphere and
the clouds! Some of them, as we see, have a prophetic faculty with
regard to the weather, for example, apes (as one can observe very well
even in Europe,—and not only in menageries, but at Gibraltar). But it
never occurs to us that it is their _sufferings_—that are their
prophets! When strong positive electricity, under the influence of an
approaching cloud not at all visible, is suddenly converted into
negative electricity, and an alteration of the weather is imminent,
these animals then behave as if an enemy were approaching them, and
prepare for defence, or flight: they generally hide themselves,—they do
not think of the bad weather as weather, but as an enemy whose hand they
already _feel_!


                                  317.

_Retrospect._—We seldom become conscious of the real pathos of any
period of life as such, as long as we continue in it, but always think
it is the only possible and reasonable thing for us henceforth, and that
it is altogether _ethos_ and not _pathos_[10]—to speak and distinguish
like the Greeks. A few notes of music to-day recalled a winter and a
house, and a life of utter solitude to my mind, and at the same time the
sentiments in which I then lived: I thought I should be able to live in
such a state always. But now I understand that it was entirely pathos
and passion, something comparable to this painfully bold and truly
comforting music,—it is not one's lot to have these sensations for
years, still less for eternities: otherwise one would become too
"ethereal" for this planet.


                                  318.

_Wisdom in Pain._—In pain there is as much wisdom as in pleasure: like
the latter it is one of the best self-preservatives of a species. Were
it not so, pain would long ago have been done away with; that it is
hurtful is no argument against it, for to be hurtful is its very
essence. In pain I hear the commanding call of the ship's captain: "Take
in sail!" "Man," the bold seafarer, must have learned to set his sails
in a thousand different ways, otherwise he could not have sailed long,
for the ocean would soon have swallowed him up. We must also know how to
live with reduced energy: as soon as pain gives its precautionary
signal, it is time to reduce the speed—some great danger, some storm, is
approaching, and we do well to "catch" as little wind as possible.—It is
true that there are men who, on the approach of severe pain, hear the
very opposite call of command, and never appear more proud, more
martial, or more happy, than when the storm is brewing; indeed, pain
itself provides them with their supreme moments! These are the heroic
men, the great _pain-bringers_ of mankind: those few and rare ones who
need just the same apology as pain generally,—and verily, it should not
be denied them! They are forces of the greatest importance for
preserving and advancing the species, were it only because they are
opposed to smug ease, and do not conceal their disgust at this kind of
happiness.


                                  319.

_As Interpreters of our Experiences._—One form of honesty has always
been lacking among founders of religions and their kin:—they have never
made their experiences a matter of the intellectual conscience. "What
did I really experience? What then took place in me and around me? Was
my understanding clear enough? Was my will directly opposed to all
deception of the senses, and courageous in its defence against fantastic
notions?"—None of them ever asked these questions, nor to this day do
any of the good religious people ask them. They have rather a thirst for
things which are _contrary to reason_, and they don't want to have too
much difficulty in satisfying this thirst,—so they experience "miracles"
and "regenerations," and hear the voices of angels! But we who are
different, who are thirsty for reason, want to look as carefully into
our experiences, as in the case of a scientific experiment, hour by
hour, day by day! We ourselves want to be our own experiments, and our
own subjects of experiment.


                                  320.

_On Meeting Again._—A: Do I quite understand you? You are in search of
something? _Where_, in the midst of the present, actual world, is _your_
niche and star? Where can _you_ lay yourself in the sun, so that you
also may have a surplus of well-being, that your existence may justify
itself? Let everyone do that for himself—you seem to say, —and let him
put talk about generalities, concern about others and society, out of
his mind!—B: I want more; I am no seeker. I want to create my own sun
for myself.


                                  321.

_A New Precaution._—Let us no longer think so much about punishing,
blaming, and improving! We shall seldom be able to alter an individual,
and if we should succeed in doing so, something else may also succeed,
perhaps unawares: _we_ may have been altered by him! Let us rather see
to it that our own influence on _all that is to come_ outweighs and
overweighs his influence! Let us not struggle in direct conflict!—all
blaming, punishing, and desire to improve comes under this category. But
let us elevate ourselves all the higher! Let us ever give to our pattern
more shining colours! Let us obscure the other by our light! No! We do
not mean to become _darker_ ourselves on his account, like all that
punish and are discontented! Let us rather go aside! Let us look away!


                                  322.

_A Simile._—Those thinkers in whom all the stars move in cyclic orbits,
are not the most profound. He who looks into himself, as into an immense
universe, and carries Milky Ways in himself, knows also how irregular
all Milky Ways are; they lead into the very chaos and labyrinth of
existence.


                                  323.

_Happiness in Destiny._—Destiny confers its greatest distinction upon us
when it has made us fight for a time on the side of our adversaries. We
are thereby _predestined_ to a great victory.


                                  324.

_In Media Vita._—No! Life has not deceived me! On the contrary, from
year to year I find it richer, more desirable and more mysterious—from
the day on which the great liberator broke my fetters, the thought that
life may be an experiment of the thinker—and not a duty, not a fatality,
not a deceit!—And knowledge itself may be for others something
different; for example, a bed of ease, or the path to a bed of ease, or
an entertainment, or a course of idling,—for me it is a world of dangers
and victories, in which even the heroic sentiments have their arena and
dancing-floor. "_Life as a means to knowledge_"—with this principle in
one's heart, one can not only be brave, but can even _live joyfully and
laugh joyfully_! And who could know how to laugh well and live well, who
did not first understand the full meaning of war and victory!


                                  325.

_What Belongs to Greatness._—Who can attain to anything great if he does
not feel the force and will in himself _to inflict_ great pain? The
ability to suffer is a small matter: in that line, weak women and even
slaves often attain masterliness. But not to perish from internal
distress and doubt when one inflicts great anguish and hears the cry of
this anguish—that is great, that belongs to greatness.


                                  326.

_Physicians of the Soul and Pain._—All preachers of morality, as also
all theologians, have a bad habit in common: all of them try to persuade
man that he is very ill, and that a severe, final, radical cure is
necessary. And because mankind as a whole has for centuries listened too
eagerly to those teachers, something of the superstition that the human
race is in a very bad way has actually come over men: so that they are
now far too ready to sigh; they find nothing more in life and make
melancholy faces at each other, as if life were indeed very hard _to
endure_. In truth, they are inordinately assured of their life and in
love with it, and full of untold intrigues and subtleties for
suppressing everything disagreeable and for extracting the thorn from
pain and misfortune. It seems to me that people always speak _with
exaggeration_ about pain and misfortune, as if it were a matter of good
behaviour to exaggerate here: on the other hand people are intentionally
silent in regard to the number of expedients for alleviating pain; as
for instance, the deadening of it, or feverish flurry of thought, or a
peaceful position, or good and bad reminiscences, intentions,
hopes,—also many kinds of pride and fellow-feeling which have almost the
effect of anæsthetics: while in the greatest degree of pain fainting
takes place of itself. We understand very well how to pour sweetness on
our bitterness, especially on the bitterness of our soul; we find a
remedy in our bravery and sublimity, as well as in the nobler delirium
of submission and resignation. A loss scarcely remains a loss for an
hour: in some way or other a gift from heaven has always fallen into our
lap at the same moment—a new form of strength, for example: be it but a
new opportunity for the exercise of strength! What have the preachers of
morality not dreamt concerning the inner "misery" of evil men! What
_lies_ have they not told us about the misfortunes of impassioned men!
Yes, lying is here the right word: they were only too well aware of the
overflowing happiness of this kind of man, but they kept silent as death
about it; because it was a refutation of their theory, according to
which happiness only originates through the annihilation of the passions
and the silencing of the will! And finally, as regards the recipe of all
those physicians of the soul and their recommendation of a severe
radical cure, we may be allowed to ask: Is our life really painful and
burdensome enough for us to exchange it with advantage for a Stoical
mode of life, and Stoical petrification? We do _not_ feel _sufficiently
miserable_ to have to feel ill in the Stoical fashion!


                                  327.

_Taking Things Seriously._—The intellect is with most people an awkward,
obscure and creaking machine, which is difficult to set in motion: they
call it "_taking a thing seriously_" when they work with this machine,
and want to think well—oh, how burdensome must good thinking be to them!
That delightful animal, man, seems to lose his good-humour whenever he
thinks well; he becomes "serious"! And "where there is laughing and
gaiety, thinking cannot be worth anything:"—so speaks the prejudice of
this serious animal against all "Joyful Wisdom."—Well, then! Let us show
that it is prejudice!


                                  328.

_Doing Harm to Stupidity._—It is certain that the belief in the
reprehensibility of egoism, preached with such stubbornness and
conviction, has on the whole done harm to egoism (_in favour of the
herd-instinct_, as I shall repeat a hundred times!), especially by
depriving it of a good conscience, and bidding us seek in it the true
source of all misfortune. "Thy selfishness is the bane of thy life"—so
rang the preaching for millenniums: it did harm, as we have said, to
selfishness, and deprived it of much spirit, much cheerfulness, much
ingenuity, and much beauty; it stultified and deformed and poisoned
selfishness!—Philosophical antiquity, on the other hand, taught that
there was another principal source of evil: from Socrates downwards, the
thinkers were never weary of preaching that "your thoughtlessness and
stupidity, your unthinking way of living according to rule, and your
subjection to the opinion of your neighbour, are the reasons why you so
seldom attain to happiness,—we thinkers are, as thinkers, the happiest
of mortals." Let us not decide here whether this preaching against
stupidity was more sound than the preaching against selfishness; it is
certain, however, that stupidity was thereby deprived of its good
conscience:—these philosophers _did harm to stupidity_.


                                  329.

_Leisure and Idleness._—There is an Indian savagery, a savagery peculiar
to the Indian blood, in the manner in which the Americans strive after
gold: and the breathless hurry of their work—the characteristic vice of
the new world—already begins to infect old Europe, and makes it savage
also, spreading over it a strange lack of intellectuality. One is now
ashamed of repose: even long reflection almost causes remorse of
conscience. Thinking is done with a stop-watch, as dining is done with
the eyes fixed on the financial newspaper; we live like men who are
continually "afraid of letting opportunities slip." "Better do anything
whatever, than nothing"—this principle also is a noose with which all
culture and all higher taste may be strangled. And just as all form
obviously disappears in this hurry of workers, so the sense for form
itself, the ear and the eye for the melody of movement, also disappear.
The proof of this is the _clumsy perspicuity_ which is now everywhere
demanded in all positions where a person would like to be sincere with
his fellows, in intercourse with friends, women, relatives, children,
teachers, pupils, leaders and princes,—one has no longer either time or
energy for ceremonies, for roundabout courtesies, for any _esprit_ in
conversation, or for any _otium_ whatever. For life in the hunt for gain
continually compels a person to consume his intellect, even to
exhaustion, in constant dissimulation, overreaching, or forestalling:
the real virtue nowadays is to do something in a shorter time than
another person. And so there are only rare hours of sincere intercourse
_permitted_: in them, however, people are tired, and would not only like
"to let themselves go," but _to stretch their legs_ out wide in awkward
style. The way people write their _letters_ nowadays is quite in keeping
with the age; their style and spirit will always be the true "sign of
the times." If there be still enjoyment in society and in art, it is
enjoyment such as over-worked slaves provide for themselves. Oh, this
moderation in "joy" of our cultured and uncultured classes! Oh, this
increasing suspiciousness of all enjoyment! _Work_ is winning over more
and more the good conscience to its side: the desire for enjoyment
already calls itself "need of recreation," and even begins to be ashamed
of itself. "One owes it to one's health," people say, when they are
caught at a picnic. Indeed, it might soon go so far that one could not
yield to the desire for the _vita contemplativa_ (that is to say,
excursions with thoughts and friends), without self-contempt and a bad
conscience.—Well! Formerly it was the very reverse: it was "action" that
suffered from a bad conscience. A man of good family _concealed_ his
work when need compelled him to labour. The slave laboured under the
weight of the feeling that he did something contemptible:—the "doing"
itself was something contemptible. "Only in _otium_ and _bellum_ is
there nobility and honour:" so rang the voice of ancient prejudice!


                                  330.

_Applause._—The thinker does not need applause nor the clapping of
hands, provided he be sure of the clapping of his own hands: the latter,
however, he cannot do without. Are there men who could also do without
this, and in general without any kind of applause? I doubt it: and even
as regards the wisest, Tacitus, who is no calumniator of the wise, says:
_quando etiam sapientibus gloriæ cupido novissima exuitur_—that means
with him: never.


                                  331.

_Better Deaf than Deafened._—Formerly a person wanted to have a
_calling_, but that no longer suffices to-day, for the market has become
too large,—there has now to be _bawling_. The consequence is that even
good throats outcry each other, and the best wares are offered for sale
with hoarse voices; without market-place bawling and hoarseness there is
now no longer any genius.—It is, sure enough, an evil age for the
thinker: he has to learn to find his stillness betwixt two noises, and
has to pretend to be deaf until he finally becomes so. As long as he has
not learned this, he is in danger of perishing from impatience and
headaches.


                                  332.

_The Evil Hour._—There has perhaps been an evil hour for every
philosopher, in which he thought: What do I matter, if people should not
believe my poor arguments!—And then some malicious bird has flown past
him and twittered: "What do you matter? What do you matter?"


                                  333.

_What does Knowing Mean?_—_Non ridere, non lugere, neque detestari, sed
intelligere!_ says Spinoza, so simply and sublimely, as is his wont.
Nevertheless, what else is this _intelligere_ ultimately, but just the
form in which the three other things become perceptible to us all at
once? A result of the diverging and opposite impulses of desiring to
deride, lament and execrate? Before knowledge is possible each of these
impulses must first have brought forward its one-sided view of the
object or event. The struggle of these one-sided views occurs
afterwards, and out of it there occasionally arises a compromise, a
pacification, a recognition of rights on all three sides, a sort of
justice and agreement: for in virtue of the justice and agreement all
those impulses can maintain themselves in existence and retain their
mutual rights. We, to whose consciousness only the closing
reconciliation scenes and final settling of accounts of these long
processes manifest themselves, think on that account that _intelligere_
is something conciliating, just and good, something essentially
antithetical to the impulses; whereas it is only _a certain relation of
the impulses to one another_. For a very long time conscious thinking
was regarded as thinking proper: it is now only that the truth dawns
upon us that the greater part of our intellectual activity goes on
unconsciously and unfelt by us; I believe, however, that the impulses
which are here in mutual conflict understand right well how to make
themselves felt by _one another_, and how to cause pain:—the violent,
sudden exhaustion which overtakes all thinkers, may have its origin here
(it is the exhaustion of the battle-field). Aye, perhaps in our
struggling interior there is much concealed _heroism_, but certainly
nothing divine, or eternally-reposing-in-itself, as Spinoza supposed.
_Conscious_ thinking, and especially that of the philosopher, is the
weakest, and on that account also the relatively mildest and quietest
mode of thinking: and thus it is precisely the philosopher who is most
easily misled concerning the nature of knowledge.


                                  334.

_One must Learn to Love._—This is our experience in music: we must first
_learn_ in general _to hear_, to hear fully, and to distinguish a theme
or a melody, we have to isolate and limit it as a life by itself; then
we need to exercise effort and good-will in order _to endure_ it in
spite of its strangeness, we need patience towards its aspect and
expression, and indulgence towards what is odd in it:—in the end there
comes a moment when we are _accustomed_ to it, when we expect it, when
it dawns upon us that we should miss it if it were lacking; and then it
goes on to exercise its spell and charm more and more, and does not
cease until we have become its humble and enraptured lovers, who want
it, and want it again, and ask for nothing better from the world.—It is
thus with us, however, not only in music: it is precisely thus that we
have _learned to love_ all things that we now love. We are always
finally recompensed for our good-will, our patience, reasonableness and
gentleness towards what is unfamiliar, by the unfamiliar slowly throwing
off its veil and presenting itself to us as a new, ineffable
beauty:—that is its _thanks_ for our hospitality. He also who loves
himself must have learned it in this way: there is no other way. Love
also has to be learned.


                                  335.

_Cheers for Physics!_—How many men are there who know how to observe?
And among the few who do know,—how many observe themselves? "Everyone is
furthest from himself"—all the "triers of the reins" know that to their
discomfort; and the saying, "Know thyself," in the mouth of a God and
spoken to man, is almost a mockery. But that the case of
self-observation is so desperate, is attested best of all by the manner
in which _almost everybody_ talks of the nature of a moral action, that
prompt, willing, convinced, loquacious manner, with its look, its smile,
and its pleasing eagerness! Everyone seems inclined to say to you: "Why,
my dear Sir, that is precisely _my_ affair! You address yourself with
your question to him who _is authorised_ to answer, for I happen to be
wiser with regard to this matter than in anything else. Therefore, when
a man decides that '_this is right_,' when he accordingly concludes that
'_it must therefore be done_,' and thereupon _does_ what he has thus
recognised as right and designated as necessary—then the nature of his
action is _moral_!" But, my friend, you are talking to me about three
actions instead of one: your deciding, for instance, that "this is
right," is also an action,—could one not judge either morally or
immorally? _Why_ do you regard this, and just this, as right?—"Because
my conscience tells me so; conscience never speaks immorally, indeed it
determines in the first place what shall be moral!"—But why do you
_listen_ to the voice of your conscience? And in how far are you
justified in regarding such a judgment as true and infallible? This
_belief_—is there no further conscience for it? Do you know nothing of
an intellectual conscience? A conscience behind your "conscience"? Your
decision, "this is right," has a previous history in your impulses, your
likes and dislikes, your experiences and non-experiences; "_how_ has it
originated?" you must ask, and afterwards the further question: "_what_
really impels me to give ear to it?" You can listen to its command like
a brave soldier who hears the command of his officer. Or like a woman
who loves him who commands. Or like a flatterer and coward, afraid of
the commander. Or like a blockhead who follows because he has nothing to
say to the contrary. In short, you can give ear to your conscience in a
hundred different ways. But _that_ you hear this or that judgment as the
voice of conscience, consequently, _that_ you feel a thing to be
right—may have its cause in the fact that you have never reflected about
yourself, and have blindly accepted from your childhood what has been
designated to you as _right_: or in the fact that hitherto bread and
honours have fallen to your share with that which you call your duty,—it
is "right" to you, because it seems to be _your_ "condition of
existence" (that you, however, have a _right_ to existence appears to
you as irrefutable!). The _persistency_ of your moral judgment might
still be just a proof of personal wretchedness or impersonality; your
"moral force" might have its source in your obstinacy—or in your
incapacity to perceive new ideals! And to be brief: if you had thought
more acutely, observed more accurately, and had learned more, you would
no longer under all circumstances call this and that your "duty" and
your "conscience": the knowledge _how moral judgments have in general
always originated_, would make you tired of these pathetic words,—as you
have already grown tired of other pathetic words, for instance "sin,"
"salvation," and "redemption."—And now, my friend, do not talk to me
about the categorical imperative! That word tickles my ear, and I must
laugh in spite of your presence and your seriousness. In this connection
I recollect old Kant, who, as a punishment for having _gained possession
surreptitiously_ of the "thing in itself"—also a very ludicrous
affair!—was imposed upon by the categorical imperative, and with that in
his heart _strayed back again_ to "God," the "soul," "freedom," and
"immortality," like a fox which strays back into its cage: and it had
been _his_ strength and shrewdness which had _broken open_ this
cage!—What? You admire the categorical imperative in you? This
"persistency" of your so-called moral judgment? This absoluteness of the
feeling that "as I think on this matter, so must everyone think"? Admire
rather your _selfishness_ therein! And the blindness, paltriness, and
modesty of your selfishness! For it is selfishness in a person to regard
_his_ judgment as universal law, and a blind, paltry and modest
selfishness besides, because it betrays that you have not yet discovered
yourself, that you have not yet created for yourself any individual,
quite individual ideal:—for this could never be the ideal of another, to
say nothing of all, of every one!——He who still thinks that "each would
have to act in this manner in this case," has not yet advanced half a
dozen paces in self-knowledge: otherwise he would know that there
neither are nor can be similar actions,—that every action that has been
done, has been done in an entirely unique and inimitable manner, and
that it will be the same with regard to all future actions; that all
precepts of conduct (and even the most esoteric and subtle precepts of
all moralities up to the present), apply only to the coarse
exterior,—that by means of them, indeed, a semblance of equality can be
attained, _but only a semblance_,—that in outlook or retrospect, _every_
action is and remains an impenetrable affair,—that our opinions of
"good," "noble" and "great" can never be demonstrated by our actions,
because no action is cognisable,—that our opinions, estimates, and
tables of values are certainly among the most powerful levers in the
mechanism of our actions, that in every single case, nevertheless, the
law of their mechanism is untraceable. Let us _confine_ ourselves,
therefore, to the purification of our opinions and appreciations, and to
the _construction of new tables of value of our own_:—we will, however,
brood no longer over the "moral worth of our actions"! Yes, my friends!
As regards the whole moral twaddle of people about one another, it is
time to be disgusted with it! To sit in judgment morally ought to be
opposed to our taste! Let us leave this nonsense and this bad taste to
those who have nothing else to do, save to drag the past a little
distance further through time, and who are never themselves the
present,—consequently to the many, to the majority! We, however, _would
seek to become what we are_,—the new, the unique, the incomparable,
making laws for ourselves and creating ourselves! And for this purpose
we must become the best students and discoverers of all the laws and
necessities in the world. We must be _physicists_ in order to be
_creators_ in that sense,—whereas hitherto all appreciations and ideals
have been based on _ignorance_ of physics, or in _contradiction_ to it.
And therefore, three cheers for physics! And still louder cheers for
that which _impels_ us to it—our honesty.


                                  336.

_Avarice of Nature._—Why has nature been so niggardly towards humanity
that she has not let human beings shine, this man more and that man
less, according to their inner abundance of light? Why have not great
men such a fine visibility in their rising and setting as the sun? How
much less equivocal would life among men then be!


                                  337.

_Future "Humanity."_—When I look at this age with the eye of a distant
future, I find nothing so remarkable in the man of the present day as
his peculiar virtue and sickness called "the historical sense." It is a
tendency to something quite new and foreign in history: if this embryo
were given several centuries and more, there might finally evolve out of
it a marvellous plant, with a smell equally marvellous, on account of
which our old earth might be more pleasant to live in than it has been
hitherto. We moderns are just beginning to form the chain of a very
powerful, future sentiment, link by link,—we hardly know what we are
doing. It almost seems to us as if it were not the question of a new
sentiment, but of the decline of all old sentiments:—the historical
sense is still something so poor and cold, and many are attacked by it
as by a frost, and are made poorer and colder by it. To others it
appears as the indication of stealthily approaching age, and our planet
is regarded by them as a melancholy invalid, who, in order to forget his
present condition, writes the history of his youth. In fact, this is one
aspect of the new sentiment. He who knows how to regard the history of
man in its entirety as _his own history_, feels in the immense
generalisation all the grief of the invalid who thinks of health, of the
old man who thinks of the dream of his youth, of the lover who is robbed
of his beloved, of the martyr whose ideal is destroyed, of the hero on
the evening of the indecisive battle which has brought him wounds and
the loss of a friend. But to bear this immense sum of grief of all
kinds, to be able to bear it, and yet still be the hero who at the
commencement of a second day of battle greets the dawn and his
happiness, as one who has an horizon of centuries before and behind him,
as the heir of all nobility, of all past intellect, and the obligatory
heir (as the noblest) of all the old nobles; while at the same time the
first of a new nobility, the equal of which has never been seen nor even
dreamt of: to take all this upon his soul, the oldest, the newest, the
losses, hopes, conquests, and victories of mankind: to have all this at
last in one soul, and to comprise it in one feeling:—this would
necessarily furnish a happiness which man has not hitherto known,—a
God's happiness, full of power and love, full of tears and laughter, a
happiness which, like the sun in the evening, continually gives of its
inexhaustible riches and empties into the sea,—and like the sun, too,
feels itself richest when even the poorest fisherman rows with golden
oars! This divine feeling might then be called—humanity!


                                  338.

_The Will to Suffering and the Compassionate._—Is it to your advantage
to be above all compassionate? And is it to the advantage of the
sufferers when you are so? But let us leave the first question for a
moment without an answer.—That from which we suffer most profoundly and
personally is almost incomprehensible and inaccessible to every one
else: in this matter we are hidden from our neighbour even when he eats
at the same table with us. Everywhere, however, where we are _noticed_
as sufferers, our suffering is interpreted in a shallow way; it belongs
to the nature of the emotion of pity to _divest_ unfamiliar suffering of
its properly personal character:—our "benefactors" lower our value and
volition more than our enemies. In most benefits which are conferred on
the unfortunate there is something shocking in the intellectual levity
with which the compassionate person plays the rôle of fate: he knows
nothing of all the inner consequences and complications which are called
misfortune for _me_ or for _you_! The entire economy of my soul and its
adjustment by "misfortune," the uprising of new sources and needs, the
closing up of old wounds, the repudiation of whole periods of the
past—none of these things which may be connected with misfortune
preoccupy the dear sympathiser. He wishes _to succour_, and does not
reflect that there is a personal necessity for misfortune; that terror,
want, impoverishment, midnight watches, adventures, hazards and mistakes
are as necessary to me and to you as their opposites, yea, that, to
speak mystically, the path to one's own heaven always leads through the
voluptuousness of one's own hell. No, he knows nothing thereof. The
"religion of compassion" (or "the heart") bids him help, and he thinks
he has helped best when he has helped most speedily! If you adherents of
this religion actually have the same sentiments towards yourselves which
you have towards your fellows, if you are unwilling to endure your own
suffering even for an hour, and continually forestall all possible
misfortune, if you regard suffering and pain generally as evil, as
detestable, as deserving of annihilation, and as blots on existence,
well, you have then, besides your religion of compassion, yet another
religion in your heart (and this is perhaps the mother of the
former)—_the religion of smug ease_. Ah, how little you know of the
_happiness_ of man, you comfortable and good-natured ones!—for happiness
and misfortune are brother and sister, and twins, who grow tall
together, or, as with you, _remain small_ together! But now let us
return to the first question.—How is it at all possible for a person to
keep to _his_ path! Some cry or other is continually calling one aside:
our eye then rarely lights on anything without it becoming necessary for
us to leave for a moment our own affairs and rush to give assistance. I
know there are hundreds of respectable and laudable methods of making me
stray _from my course_, and in truth the most "moral" of methods!
Indeed, the opinion of the present-day preachers of the morality of
compassion goes so far as to imply that just this, and this alone is
moral:—to stray from _our_ course to that extent and to run to the
assistance of our neighbour. I am equally certain that I need only give
myself over to the sight of one case of actual distress, and I, too,
_am_ lost! And if a suffering friend said to me, "See, I shall soon die,
only promise to die with me"—I might promise it, just as—to select for
once bad examples for good reasons—the sight of a small, mountain people
struggling for freedom, would bring me to the point of offering them my
hand and my life. Indeed, there is even a secret seduction in all this
awakening of compassion, and calling for help: our "own way" is a thing
too hard and insistent, and too far removed from the love and gratitude
of others,—we escape from it and from our most personal conscience, not
at all unwillingly, and, seeking security in the conscience of others,
we take refuge in the lovely temple of the "religion of pity." As soon
now as any war breaks out, there always breaks out at the same time a
certain secret delight precisely in the noblest class of the people:
they rush with rapture to meet the new danger of _death_, because they
believe that in the sacrifice for their country they have finally that
long-sought-for permission—the permission _to shirk their aim_:—war is
for them a detour to suicide, a detour, however, with a good conscience.
And although silent here about some things, I will not, however, be
silent about my morality, which says to me: Live in concealment in order
that thou _mayest_ live to thyself. Live _ignorant_ of that which seems
to thy age to be most important! Put at least the skin of three
centuries betwixt thyself and the present day! And the clamour of the
present day, the noise of wars and revolutions, ought to be a murmur to
thee! Thou wilt also want to help, but only those whose distress thou
entirely _understandest_, because they have _one_ sorrow and _one_ hope
in common with thee—thy _friends_: and only in _the_ way that thou
helpest thyself:—I want to make them more courageous, more enduring,
more simple, more joyful! I want to teach them that which at present so
few understand, and the preachers of fellowship in sorrow least of
all:—namely, _fellowship in joy_!


                                  339.

_Vita femina._—To see the ultimate beauties in a work—all knowledge and
good-will is not enough; it requires the rarest, good chance for the
veil of clouds to move for once from the summits, and for the sun to
shine on them. We must not only stand at precisely the right place to
see this, our very soul itself must have pulled away the veil from its
heights, and must be in need of an external expression and simile, so as
to have a support and remain master of itself. All these, however, are
so rarely united at the same time that I am inclined to believe that the
highest summit of all that is good, be it work, deed, man, or nature,
has hitherto remained for most people, and even for the best, as
something concealed and shrouded:—that, however, which unveils itself to
us, _unveils itself to us but once_. The Greeks indeed prayed: "Twice
and thrice, everything beautiful!" Ah, they had their good reason to
call on the Gods, for ungodly actuality does not furnish us with the
beautiful at all, or only does so once! I mean to say that the world is
overfull of beautiful things, but it is nevertheless poor, very poor, in
beautiful moments, and in the unveiling of those beautiful things. But
perhaps this is the greatest charm of life: it puts a gold-embroidered
veil of lovely potentialities over itself, promising, resisting, modest,
mocking, sympathetic, seductive. Yes, life is a woman!


                                  340.

_The Dying Socrates._—I admire the courage and wisdom of Socrates in all
that he did, said—and did not say. This mocking and amorous demon and
rat-catcher of Athens, who made the most insolent youths tremble and sob
was not only the wisest babbler that has ever lived, but was just as
great in his silence. I would that he had also been silent in the last
moment of his life,—perhaps he might then have belonged to a still
higher order of intellects. Whether it was death, or the poison, or
piety, or wickedness—something or other loosened his tongue at that
moment, and he said: "O Crito, I owe a cock to Asclepios." For him who
has ears, this ludicrous and terrible "last word" implies: "O Crito,
_life is a long sickness_!" Is it possible! A man like him, who had
lived cheerfully and to all appearance as a soldier,—was a pessimist! He
had merely put on a good demeanour towards life, and had all along
concealed his ultimate judgment, his profoundest sentiment! Socrates,
Socrates _had suffered from life_! And he also took his revenge for
it—with that veiled, fearful, pious, and blasphemous phrase! Had even a
Socrates to revenge himself? Was there a grain too little of magnanimity
in his superabundant virtue? Ah, my friends! We must surpass even the
Greeks!


                                  341.

_The Heaviest Burden._—What if a demon crept after thee into thy
loneliest loneliness some day or night, and said to thee: "This life, as
thou livest it at present, and hast lived it, thou must live it once
more, and also innumerable times; and there will be nothing new in it,
but every pain and every joy and every thought and every sigh, and all
the unspeakably small and great in thy life must come to thee again, and
all in the same series and sequence—and similarly this spider and this
moonlight among the trees, and similarly this moment, and I myself. The
eternal sand-glass of existence will ever be turned once more, and thou
with it, thou speck of dust!"—Wouldst thou not throw thyself down and
gnash thy teeth, and curse the demon that so spake? Or hast thou once
experienced a tremendous moment in which thou wouldst answer him: "Thou
art a God, and never did I hear aught more divine!" If that thought
acquired power over thee, as thou art, it would transform thee, and
perhaps crush thee; the question with regard to all and everything:
"Dost thou want this once more, and also for innumerable times?" would
lie as the heaviest burden upon thy activity! Or, how wouldst thou have
to become favourably inclined to thyself and to life, so as _to long for
nothing more ardently_ than for this last eternal sanctioning and
sealing?—


                                  342.

_Incipit Tragœdia._—When Zarathustra was thirty years old, he left his
home and the Lake of Urmi, and went into the mountains. There he enjoyed
his spirit and his solitude, and for ten years did not weary of it. But
at last his heart changed,—and rising one morning with the rosy dawn, he
went before the sun and spake thus unto it: "Thou great star! What would
be thy happiness if thou hadst not those for whom thou shinest! For ten
years hast thou climbed hither unto my cave: thou wouldst have wearied
of thy light and of the journey, had it not been for me, mine eagle, and
my serpent. But we awaited thee every morning, took from thee thine
overflow, and blessed thee for it. Lo! I am weary of my wisdom, like the
bee that hath gathered too much honey; I need hands outstretched to take
it. I would fain bestow and distribute, until the wise have once more
become joyous in their folly, and the poor happy in their riches.
Therefore must I descend into the deep, as thou doest in the evening,
when thou goest behind the sea and givest light also to the
nether-world, thou most rich star! Like thee must I _go down_, as men
say, to whom I shall descend. Bless me then, thou tranquil eye, that
canst behold even the greatest happiness without envy! Bless the cup
that is about to overflow, that the water may flow golden out of it, and
carry everywhere the reflection of thy bliss! Lo! This cup is again
going to empty itself, and Zarathustra is again going to be a man."—Thus
began Zarathustra's down-going.

-----

Footnote 10:

  The distinction between ethos and pathos in Aristotle is, broadly,
  that between internal character and external circumstance.—P. V. C.




                               BOOK FIFTH

                            WE FEARLESS ONES


                                          "Carcasse, tu trembles? Tu
                                          tremblerais bien davantage, si
                                          tu savais, où je te mène."—
                                          _Turenne._


                                  343.

_What our Cheerfulness Signifies._—The most important of more recent
events—that "God is dead," that the belief in the Christian God has
become unworthy of belief—already begins to cast its first shadows over
Europe. To the few at least whose eye, whose _suspecting_ glance, is
strong enough and subtle enough for this drama, some sun seems to have
set, some old, profound confidence seems to have changed into doubt: our
old world must seem to them daily more darksome, distrustful, strange
and "old." In the main, however, one may say that the event itself is
far too great, too remote, too much beyond most people's power of
apprehension, for one to suppose that so much as the report of it could
have _reached_ them; not to speak of many who already knew _what_ had
really taken place, and what must all collapse now that this belief had
been undermined,—because so much was built upon it, so much rested on
it, and had become one with it: for example, our entire European
morality. This lengthy, vast and uninterrupted process of crumbling,
destruction, ruin and overthrow which is now imminent: who has realised
it sufficiently to-day to have to stand up as the teacher and herald of
such a tremendous logic of terror, as the prophet of a period of gloom
and eclipse, the like of which has probably never taken place on earth
before?... Even we, the born riddle-readers, who wait as it were on the
mountains posted 'twixt to-day and to-morrow, and engirt by their
contradiction, we, the firstlings and premature children of the coming
century, into whose sight especially the shadows which must forthwith
envelop Europe _should_ already have come—how is it that even we,
without genuine sympathy for this period of gloom, contemplate its
advent without any _personal_ solicitude or fear? Are we still, perhaps,
too much under the _immediate effects_ of the event—and are these
effects, especially as regards _ourselves_, perhaps the reverse of what
was to be expected—not at all sad and depressing, but rather like a new
and indescribable variety of light, happiness, relief, enlivenment,
encouragement, and dawning day?... In fact, we philosophers and "free
spirits" feel ourselves irradiated as by a new dawn by the report that
the "old God is dead"; our hearts overflow with gratitude, astonishment,
presentiment and expectation. At last the horizon seems open once more,
granting even that it is not bright; our ships can at last put out to
sea in face of every danger; every hazard is again permitted to the
discerner; the sea, _our_ sea, again lies open before us; perhaps never
before did such an "open sea" exist.—


                                  344.

_To what Extent even We are still Pious._—It is said with good reason
that convictions have no civic rights in the domain of science: it is
only when a conviction voluntarily condescends to the modesty of an
hypothesis, a preliminary standpoint for experiment, or a regulative
fiction, that its access to the realm of knowledge, and a certain value
therein, can be conceded,—always, however, with the restriction that it
must remain under police supervision, under the police of our
distrust.—Regarded more accurately, however, does not this imply that
only when a conviction _ceases_ to be a conviction can it obtain
admission into science? Does not the discipline of the scientific spirit
just commence when one no longer harbours any conviction?... It is
probably so: only, it remains to be asked whether, _in order that this
discipline may commence_, it is not necessary that there should already
be a conviction, and in fact one so imperative and absolute, that it
makes a sacrifice of all other convictions. One sees that science also
rests on a belief: there is no science at all "without premises." The
question whether _truth_ is necessary, must not merely be affirmed
beforehand, but must be affirmed to such an extent that the principle,
belief, or conviction finds expression, that "there is _nothing more
necessary_ than truth, and in comparison with it everything else has
only a secondary value."—This absolute will to truth: what is it? Is it
the will _not to allow ourselves to be deceived_? Is it the will _not to
deceive_? For the will to truth could also be interpreted in this
fashion, provided one includes under the generalisation, "I will not
deceive," the special case, "I will not deceive myself." But why not
deceive? Why not allow oneself to be deceived?—Let it be noted that the
reasons for the former eventuality belong to a category quite different
from those for the latter: one does not want to be deceived oneself,
under the supposition that it is injurious, dangerous, or fatal to be
deceived,—in this sense science would be a prolonged process of caution,
foresight and utility; against which, however, one might reasonably make
objections. What? is not-wishing-to-be-deceived really less injurious,
less dangerous, less fatal? What do you know of the character of
existence in all its phases to be able to decide whether the greater
advantage is on the side of absolute distrust, or of absolute
trustfulness? In case, however, of both being necessary, much trusting
_and_ much distrusting, whence then should science derive the absolute
belief, the conviction on which it rests, that truth is more important
than anything else, even than every other conviction? This conviction
could not have arisen if truth _and_ untruth had both continually proved
themselves to be useful: as is the case. Thus—the belief in science,
which now undeniably exists, cannot have had its origin in such a
utilitarian calculation, but rather _in spite of_ the fact of the
inutility and dangerousness of the "Will to truth," of "truth at all
costs," being continually demonstrated. "At all costs": alas, we
understand that sufficiently well, after having sacrificed and
slaughtered one belief after another at this altar!—Consequently, "Will
to truth" does _not_ imply, "I will not allow myself to be deceived,"
but—there is no other alternative—"I will not deceive, not even myself":
_and thus we have reached the realm of morality_. For, let one just ask
oneself fairly: "Why wilt thou not deceive?" especially if it should
seem—and it does seem—as if life were laid out with a view to
appearance, I mean, with a view to error, deceit, dissimulation,
delusion, self-delusion; and when on the other hand it is a matter of
fact that the great type of life has always manifested itself on the
side of the most unscrupulous πολύτροποι. Such an intention might
perhaps, to express it mildly, be a piece of Quixotism, a little
enthusiastic craziness; it might also, however, be something worse,
namely, a destructive principle, hostile to life.... "Will to
Truth,"—that might be a concealed Will to Death.—Thus the question, Why
is there science? leads back to the moral problem: _What in general is
the purpose of morality_, if life, nature, and history are "non-moral"?
There is no doubt that the conscientious man in the daring and extreme
sense in which he is presupposed by the belief in science, _affirms
thereby a world other than_ that of life, nature, and history; and in so
far as he affirms this "other world," what? must he not just
thereby—deny its counterpart, this world, _our_ world?... But what I
have in view will now be understood, namely, that it is always a
_metaphysical belief_ on which our belief in science rests,—and that
even we knowing ones of to-day, the godless and anti-metaphysical, still
take _our_ fire from the conflagration kindled by a belief a millennium
old, the Christian belief, which was also the belief of Plato, that God
is truth, that the truth is divine.... But what if this itself always
becomes more untrustworthy, what if nothing any longer proves itself
divine, except it be error, blindness, and falsehood;—what if God
himself turns out to be our most persistent lie?—


                                  345.

_Morality as a Problem._—A defect in personality revenges itself
everywhere: an enfeebled, lank, obliterated, self-disavowing and
disowning personality is no longer fit for anything good—it is least of
all fit for philosophy. "Selflessness" has no value either in heaven or
on earth; the great problems all demand _great love_, and it is only the
strong, well-rounded, secure spirits, those who have a solid basis, that
are qualified for them. It makes the most material difference whether a
thinker stands personally related to his problems, having his fate, his
need, and even his highest happiness therein; or merely impersonally,
that is to say, if he can only feel and grasp them with the tentacles of
cold, prying thought. In the latter case I warrant that nothing comes of
it: for the great problems, granting that they let themselves be grasped
at all, do not let themselves be _held_ by toads and weaklings: that has
ever been their taste—a taste also which they share with all
high-spirited women.—How is it that I have not yet met with any one, not
even in books, who seems to have stood to morality in this position, as
one who knew morality as a problem, and this problem as _his own_
personal need, affliction, pleasure and passion? It is obvious that up
to the present morality has not been a problem at all; it has rather
been the very ground on which people have met, after all distrust,
dissension, and contradiction, the hallowed place of peace, where
thinkers could obtain rest even from themselves, could recover breath
and revive. I see no one who has ventured to _criticise_ the estimates
of moral worth. I miss in this connection even the attempts of
scientific curiosity, and the fastidious, groping imagination of
psychologists and historians, which easily anticipates a problem and
catches it on the wing, without rightly knowing what it catches. With
difficulty I have discovered some scanty data for the purpose of
furnishing a _history of the origin_ of these feelings and estimates of
value (which is something different from a criticism of them, and also
something different from a history of ethical systems). In an individual
case, I have done everything to encourage the inclination and talent for
this kind of history—in vain, as it would seem to me at present. There
is little to be learned from those historians of morality (especially
Englishmen): they themselves are usually, quite unsuspiciously, under
the influence of a definite morality, and act unwittingly as its
armour-bearers and followers—perhaps still repeating sincerely the
popular superstition of Christian Europe, that the characteristic of
moral action consists in abnegation, self-denial, self-sacrifice, or in
fellow-feeling and fellow-suffering. The usual error in their premises
is their insistence on a certain _consensus_ among human beings, at
least among civilised human beings, with regard to certain propositions
of morality, and from thence they conclude that these propositions are
absolutely binding even upon you and me; or reversely, they come to the
conclusion that _no_ morality at all is binding, after the truth has
dawned upon them that to different peoples moral valuations are
_necessarily_ different: both of which conclusions are equally childish
follies. The error of the more subtle amongst them is that they discover
and criticise the probably foolish opinions of a people about its own
morality, or the opinions of mankind about human morality generally;
they treat accordingly of its origin, its religious sanctions, the
superstition of free will, and such matters; and they think that just by
so doing they have criticised the morality itself. But the worth of a
precept, "Thou shalt," is still fundamentally different from and
independent of such opinions about it, and must be distinguished from
the weeds of error with which it has perhaps been overgrown: just as the
worth of a medicine to a sick person is altogether independent of the
question whether he has a scientific opinion about medicine, or merely
thinks about it as an old wife would do. A morality could even have
grown _out of_ an error: but with this knowledge the problem of its
worth would not even be touched.—Thus, no one has hitherto tested the
_value_ of that most celebrated of all medicines, called morality: for
which purpose it is first of all necessary for one—_to call it in
question_. Well, that is just our work.—


                                  346.

_Our Note of Interrogation._—But you don't understand it? As a matter of
fact, an effort will be necessary in order to understand us. We seek for
words; we seek perhaps also for ears. Who are we after all? If we wanted
simply to call ourselves in older phraseology, atheists, unbelievers, or
even immoralists, we should still be far from thinking ourselves
designated thereby: we are all three in too late a phase for people
generally to conceive, for _you_, my inquisitive friends, to be able to
conceive, what is our state of mind under the circumstances. No! we have
no longer the bitterness and passion of him who has broken loose, who
has to make for himself a belief, a goal, and even a martyrdom out of
his unbelief! We have become saturated with the conviction (and have
grown cold and hard in it) that things are not at all divinely ordered
in this world, nor even according to human standards do they go on
rationally, mercifully, or justly: we know the fact that the world in
which we live is ungodly, immoral, and "inhuman,"—we have far too long
interpreted it to ourselves falsely and mendaciously, according to the
wish and will of our veneration, that is to say, according to our
_need_. For man is a venerating animal! But he is also a distrustful
animal: and that the world is _not_ worth what we have believed it to be
worth is about the surest thing our distrust has at last managed to
grasp. So much distrust, so much philosophy! We take good care not to
say that the world is of _less_ value: it seems to us at present
absolutely ridiculous when man claims to devise values _to surpass_ the
values of the actual world,—it is precisely from that point that we have
retraced our steps; as from an extravagant error of human conceit and
irrationality, which for a long period has not been recognised as such.
This error had its last expression in modern Pessimism; an older and
stronger manifestation in the teaching of Buddha; but Christianity also
contains it, more dubiously, to be sure, and more ambiguously, but none
the less seductive on that account. The whole attitude of "man _versus_
the world," man as world-denying principle, man as the standard of the
value of things, as judge of the world, who in the end puts existence
itself on his scales and finds it too light—the monstrous impertinence
of this attitude has dawned upon us as such, and has disgusted us,—we
now laugh when we find, "Man _and_ World" placed beside one another,
separated by the sublime presumption of the little word "and"! But how
is it? Have we not in our very laughing just made a further step in
despising mankind? And consequently also in Pessimism, in despising the
existence cognisable _by us_? Have we not just thereby become liable to
a suspicion of an opposition between the world in which we have hitherto
been at home with our venerations—for the sake of which we perhaps
_endure_ life—and another world _which we ourselves are_: an inexorable,
radical, most profound suspicion concerning ourselves, which is
continually getting us Europeans more annoyingly into its power, and
could easily face the coming generation with the terrible alternative:
"Either do away with your venerations, or—_with yourselves_!" The latter
would be Nihilism—but would not the former also be Nihilism? This is
_our_ note of interrogation.


                                  347.

_Believers and their Need of Belief._—How much _faith_ a person requires
in order to flourish, how much "fixed opinion" he requires which he does
not wish to have shaken, because he _holds_ himself thereby—is a measure
of his power (or more plainly speaking, of his weakness). Most people in
old Europe, as it seems to me, still need Christianity at present, and
on that account it still finds belief. For such is man: a theological
dogma might be refuted to him a thousand times,—provided, however, that
he had need of it, he would again and again accept it as
"true,"—according to the famous "proof of power" of which the Bible
speaks. Some have still need of metaphysics; but also the impatient
_longing for certainty_ which at present discharges itself in
scientific, positivist fashion among large numbers of the people, the
longing by all means to get at something stable (while on account of the
warmth of the longing the establishing of the certainty is more
leisurely and negligently undertaken): even this is still the longing
for a hold, a support; in short, the _instinct of weakness_, which,
while not actually creating religions, metaphysics, and convictions of
all kinds, nevertheless—preserves them. In fact, around all these
positivist systems there fume the vapours of a certain pessimistic
gloom, something of weariness, fatalism, disillusionment, and fear of
new disillusionment—or else manifest animosity, ill-humour, anarchic
exasperation, and whatever there is of symptom or masquerade of the
feeling of weakness. Even the readiness with which our cleverest
contemporaries get lost in wretched corners and alleys, for example, in
Vaterländerei (so I designate Jingoism, called _chauvinisme_ in France,
and "_deutsch_" in Germany), or in petty æsthetic creeds in the manner
of Parisian _naturalisme_ (which only brings into prominence and
uncovers _that_ aspect of nature which excites simultaneously disgust
and astonishment—they like at present to call this aspect _la vérité
vraie_), or in Nihilism in the St Petersburg style (that is to say, in
the _belief in unbelief_, even to martyrdom for it):—this shows always
and above all the need of belief, support, backbone, and buttress....
Belief is always most desired, most pressingly needed where there is a
lack of will: for the will, as emotion of command, is the distinguishing
characteristic of sovereignty and power. That is to say, the less a
person knows how to command, the more urgent is his desire for one who
commands, who commands sternly,—a God, a prince, a caste, a physician, a
confessor, a dogma, a party conscience. From whence perhaps it could be
inferred that the two world-religions, Buddhism and Christianity, might
well have had the cause of their rise, and especially of their rapid
extension, in an extraordinary _malady of the will_. And in truth it has
been so: both religions lighted upon a longing, monstrously exaggerated
by malady of the will, for an imperative, a "Thou-shalt," a longing
going the length of despair; both religions were teachers of fanaticism
in times of slackness of will-power, and thereby offered to innumerable
persons a support, a new possibility of exercising will, an enjoyment in
willing. For in fact fanaticism is the sole "volitional strength" to
which the weak and irresolute can be excited, as a sort of hypnotising
of the entire sensory-intellectual system, in favour of the
over-abundant nutrition (hypertrophy) of a particular point of view and
a particular sentiment, which then dominates—the Christian calls it his
_faith_. When a man arrives at the fundamental conviction that he
_requires_ to be commanded, he becomes "a believer." Reversely, one
could imagine a delight and a power of self-determining, and a _freedom_
of will whereby a spirit could bid farewell to every belief, to every
wish for certainty, accustomed as it would be to support itself on
slender cords and possibilities, and to dance even on the verge of
abysses. Such a spirit would be the _free spirit par excellence_.


                                  348.

_The Origin of the Learned._—The learned man in Europe grows out of all
the different ranks and social conditions, like a plant requiring no
specific soil: on that account he belongs essentially and involuntarily
to the partisans of democratic thought. But this origin betrays itself.
If one has trained one's glance to some extent to recognise in a learned
book or scientific treatise the intellectual _idiosyncrasy_ of the
learned man—all of them have such idiosyncrasy,—and if we take it by
surprise, we shall almost always get a glimpse behind it of the
"antecedent history" of the learned man and his family, especially of
the nature of their callings and occupations. Where the feeling finds
expression, "That is at last proved, I am now done with it," it is
commonly the ancestor in the blood and instincts of the learned man that
approves of the "accomplished work" in the nook from which he sees
things;—the belief in the proof is only an indication of what has been
looked upon for ages by a laborious family as "good work." Take an
example: the sons of registrars and office-clerks of every kind, whose
main task has always been to arrange a variety of material, distribute
it in drawers, and systematise it generally, evince, when they become
learned men, an inclination to regard a problem as almost solved when
they have systematised it. There are philosophers who are at bottom
nothing but systematising brains—the formal part of the paternal
occupation has become its essence to them. The talent for
classifications, for tables of categories, betrays something; it is not
for nothing that a person is the child of his parents. The son of an
advocate will also have to be an advocate as investigator: he seeks as a
first consideration, to carry the point in his case, as a second
consideration, he perhaps seeks to be in the right. One recognises the
sons of Protestant clergymen and schoolmasters by the naïve assurance
with which as learned men they already assume their case to be proved,
when it has but been presented by them staunchly and warmly: they are
thoroughly accustomed to people _believing_ in them,—it belonged to
their fathers' "trade"! A Jew, contrariwise, in accordance with his
business surroundings and the past of his race, is least of all
accustomed—to people believing him. Observe Jewish scholars with regard
to this matter,—they all lay great stress on logic, that is to say, on
_compelling_ assent by means of reasons; they know that they must
conquer thereby, even when race and class antipathy is against them,
even where people are unwilling to believe them. For in fact, nothing is
more democratic than logic: it knows no respect of persons, and takes
even the crooked nose as straight. (In passing we may remark that in
respect to logical thinking, in respect to _cleaner_ intellectual
habits, Europe is not a little indebted to the Jews; above all the
Germans, as being a lamentably _déraisonnable_ race, who, even at the
present day, must always have their "heads washed"[11] in the first
place. Wherever the Jews have attained to influence, they have taught to
analyse more subtly, to argue more acutely, to write more clearly and
purely: it has always been their problem to bring a people "to
_raison_.")


                                  349.

_The Origin of the Learned once more._—To seek self-preservation merely,
is the expression of a state of distress, or of limitation of the true,
fundamental instinct of life, which aims at the _extension of power_,
and with this in view often enough calls in question self-preservation
and sacrifices it. It should be taken as symptomatic when individual
philosophers, as for example, the consumptive Spinoza, have seen and
have been obliged to see the principal feature of life precisely in the
so-called self-preservative instinct:—they have just been men in states
of distress. That our modern natural sciences have entangled themselves
so much with Spinoza's dogma (finally and most grossly in Darwinism,
with its inconceivably one-sided doctrine of the "struggle for
existence"—), is probably owing to the origin of most of the inquirers
into nature: they belong in this respect to the people, their
forefathers have been poor and humble persons, who knew too well by
immediate experience the difficulty of making a living. Over the whole
of English Darwinism there hovers something of the suffocating air of
over-crowded England, something of the odour of humble people in need
and in straits. But as an investigator of nature, a person ought to
emerge from his paltry human nook: and in nature the state of distress
does not _prevail_, but superfluity, even prodigality to the extent of
folly. The struggle for existence is only an _exception_, a temporary
restriction of the will to live; the struggle, be it great or small,
turns everywhere on predominance, on increase and expansion, on power,
in conformity to the will to power, which is just the will to live.


                                  350.

_In Honour of Homines Religiosi._—The struggle against the church is
most certainly (among other things—for it has a manifold significance)
the struggle of the more ordinary, cheerful, confiding, superficial
natures against the rule of the graver, profounder, more contemplative
natures, that is to say, the more malign and suspicious men, who with
long continued distrust in the worth of life, brood also over their own
worth:—the ordinary instinct of the people, its sensual gaiety, its
"good heart," revolts against them. The entire Roman Church rests on a
Southern suspicion of the nature of man (always misunderstood in the
North), a suspicion whereby the European South has succeeded to the
inheritance of the profound Orient—the mysterious, venerable Asia—and
its contemplative spirit. Protestantism was a popular insurrection in
favour of the simple, the respectable, the superficial (the North has
always been more good-natured and more shallow than the South), but it
was the French Revolution that first gave the sceptre wholly and
solemnly into the hands of the "good man" (the sheep, the ass, the
goose, and everything incurably shallow, bawling, and fit for the Bedlam
of "modern ideas").


                                  351.

_In Honour of Priestly Natures._—I think that philosophers have always
felt themselves furthest removed from that which the people (in all
classes of society nowadays) take for wisdom: the prudent, bovine
placidity, piety, and country-parson meekness, which lies in the meadow
and _gazes at_ life seriously and ruminatingly:—this is probably because
philosophers have not had sufficiently the taste of the "people," or of
the country-parson for that kind of wisdom. Philosophers will also
perhaps be the latest to acknowledge that the people _should_ understand
something of that which lies furthest from them, something of the great
_passion_ of the thinker, who lives and must live continually in the
storm-cloud of the highest problems and the heaviest responsibilities
(consequently, not gazing at all, to say nothing of doing so
indifferently, securely, objectively). The people venerate an entirely
different type of man when on their part they form the ideal of a
"sage," and they are a thousand times justified in rendering homage with
the highest eulogies and honours to precisely that type of men—namely,
the gentle, serious, simple, chaste, priestly natures and those related
to them,—it is to them that the praise falls due in the popular
veneration of wisdom. And to whom should the people ever have more
reason to be grateful than to these men who pertain to its class and
rise from its ranks, but are persons consecrated, chosen, and
_sacrificed_ for its good—they themselves believe themselves sacrificed
to God,—before whom the people can pour forth its heart with impunity,
by whom it can _get rid_ of its secrets, cares, and worse things (for
the man who "communicates himself" gets rid of himself, and he who has
"confessed" forgets). Here there exists a great need: for sewers and
pure cleansing waters are required also for spiritual filth, and rapid
currents of love are needed, and strong, lowly, pure hearts, who qualify
and sacrifice themselves for such service of the non-public health
department—for it _is_ a sacrificing, the priest is, and continues to
be, a human sacrifice.... The people regard such sacrificed, silent,
serious men of "faith" as "_wise_," that is to say, as men who have
become sages, as "reliable" in relation to their own unreliability. Who
would desire to deprive the people of that expression and that
veneration?—But as is fair on the other side, among philosophers the
priest also is still held to belong to the "people," and is _not_
regarded as a sage, because, above all, they themselves do not believe
in "sages," and they already scent "the people" in this very belief and
superstition. It was _modesty_ which invented in Greece the word
"philosopher," and left to the play-actors of the spirit the superb
arrogance of assuming the name "wise"—the modesty of such monsters of
pride and self-glorification as Pythagoras and Plato.—


                                  352.

_Why we can hardly Dispense with Morality._—The naked man is generally
an ignominious spectacle—I speak of us European males (and by no means
of European females!). If the most joyous company at table suddenly
found themselves stripped and divested of their garments through the
trick of an enchanter, I believe that not only would the joyousness be
gone and the strongest appetite lost;—it seems that we Europeans cannot
at all dispense with the masquerade that is called clothing. But should
not the disguise of "moral men," the screening under moral formulæ and
notions of decency, the whole kindly concealment of our conduct under
conceptions of duty, virtue, public sentiment, honourableness, and
disinterestedness, have just as good reasons in support of it? Not that
I mean hereby that human wickedness and baseness, in short, the evil
wild beast in us, should be disguised; on the contrary, my idea is that
it is precisely as _tame animals_ that we are an ignominious spectacle
and require moral disguising,—that the "inner man" in Europe is far from
having enough of intrinsic evil "to let himself be seen" with it (to be
_beautiful_ with it). The European disguises himself _in morality_
because he has become a sick, sickly, crippled animal, who has good
reasons for being "tame," because he is almost an abortion, an
imperfect, weak and clumsy thing.... It is not the fierceness of the
beast of prey that finds moral disguise necessary, but the gregarious
animal, with its profound mediocrity, anxiety and ennui. _Morality
dresses up the European_—let us acknowledge it!—in more distinguished,
more important, more conspicuous guise—in "divine" guise—


                                  353.

_The Origin of Religions._—The real inventions of founders of religions
are, on the one hand, to establish a definite mode of life and everyday
custom, which operates as _disciplina voluntatis_, and at the same time
does away with ennui; and on the other hand, to give to that very mode
of life an _interpretation_, by virtue of which it appears illumined
with the highest value; so that it henceforth becomes a good for which
people struggle, and under certain circumstances lay down their lives.
In truth, the second of these inventions is the more essential: the
first, the mode of life, has usually been there already, side by side,
however, with other modes of life, and still unconscious of the value
which it embodies. The import, the originality of the founder of a
religion, discloses itself usually in the fact that he _sees_ the mode
of life, _selects_ it, and _divines_ for the first time the purpose for
which it can be used, how it can be interpreted. Jesus (or Paul), for
example, found around him the life of the common people in the Roman
province, a modest, virtuous, oppressed life: he interpreted it, he put
the highest significance and value into it—and thereby the courage to
despise every other mode of life, the calm fanaticism of the Moravians,
the secret, subterranean self-confidence which goes on increasing, and
is at last ready "to overcome the world" (that is to say, Rome, and the
upper classes throughout the empire). Buddha, in like manner, found the
same type of man,—he found it in fact dispersed among all the classes
and social ranks of a people who were good and kind (and above all
inoffensive), owing to indolence, and who likewise owing to indolence,
lived abstemiously, almost without requirements. He understood that such
a type of man, with all its _vis inertiae_, had inevitably to glide into
a belief which promises _to avoid_ the return of earthly ill (that is to
say, labour and activity generally),—this "understanding" was his
genius. The founder of a religion possesses psychological infallibility
in the knowledge of a definite, average type of souls, who have not yet
_recognised_ themselves as akin. It is he who brings them together: the
founding of a religion, therefore, always becomes a long ceremony of
recognition.—


                                  354.

_The "Genius of the Species."_—The problem of consciousness (or more
correctly: of becoming conscious of oneself) meets us only when we begin
to perceive in what measure we could dispense with it: and it is at the
beginning of this perception that we are now placed by physiology and
zoology (which have thus required two centuries to overtake the hint
thrown out in advance by Leibnitz). For we could in fact think, feel,
will, and recollect, we could likewise "act" in every sense of the term,
and nevertheless nothing of it all would require to "come into
consciousness" (as one says metaphorically). The whole of life would be
possible without its seeing itself as it were in a mirror: as in fact
even at present the far greater part of our life still goes on without
this mirroring,—and even our thinking, feeling, volitional life as well,
however painful this statement may sound to an older philosopher. _What_
then is _the purpose_ of consciousness generally, when it is in the main
_superfluous_?—Now it seems to me, if you will hear my answer and its
perhaps extravagant supposition, that the subtlety and strength of
consciousness are always in proportion to the _capacity for
communication_ of a man (or an animal), the capacity for communication
in its turn being in proportion to the _necessity for communication_:
the latter not to be understood as if precisely the individual himself
who is master in the art of communicating and making known his
necessities would at the same time have to be most dependent upon others
for his necessities. It seems to me, however, to be so in relation to
whole races and successions of generations: where necessity and need
have long compelled men to communicate with their fellows and understand
one another rapidly and subtly, a surplus of the power and art of
communication is at last acquired, as if it were a fortune which had
gradually accumulated, and now waited for an heir to squander it
prodigally (the so-called artists are these heirs, in like manner the
orators, preachers, and authors: all of them men who come at the end of
a long succession, "late-born" always, in the best sense of the word,
and as has been said, _squanderers_ by their very nature). Granted that
this observation is correct, I may proceed further to the conjecture
that _consciousness generally has only been developed under the pressure
of the necessity for communication_,—that from the first it has been
necessary and useful only between man and man (especially between those
commanding and those obeying), and has only developed in proportion to
its utility. Consciousness is properly only a connecting network between
man and man,—it is only as such that it has had to develop; the recluse
and wild-beast species of men would not have needed it. The very fact
that our actions, thoughts, feelings and motions come within the range
of our consciousness—at least a part of them—is the result of a
terrible, prolonged "must" ruling man's destiny: as the most endangered
animal he _needed_ help and protection; he needed his fellows, he was
obliged to express his distress, he had to know how to make himself
understood—and for all this he needed "consciousness" first of all,
consequently, to "know" himself what he lacked, to "know" how he felt
and to "know" what he thought. For, to repeat it once more, man, like
every living creature, thinks unceasingly, but does not know it; the
thinking which is becoming _conscious of itself_ is only the smallest
part thereof, we may say, the most superficial part, the worst part:—for
this conscious thinking alone _is done in words, that is to say, in the
symbols for communication_, by means of which the origin of
consciousness is revealed. In short, the development of speech and the
development of consciousness (not of reason, but of reason becoming
self-conscious) go hand in hand. Let it be further accepted that it is
not only speech that serves as a bridge between man and man, but also
the looks, the pressure and the gestures; our becoming conscious of our
sense impressions, our power of being able to fix them, and as it were
to locate them outside of ourselves, has increased in proportion as the
necessity has increased for communicating them to _others_ by means of
signs. The sign-inventing man is at the same time the man who is always
more acutely self-conscious; it is only as a social animal that man has
learned to become conscious of himself,—he is doing so still, and doing
so more and more.—As is obvious, my idea is that consciousness does not
properly belong to the individual existence of man, but rather to the
social and gregarious nature in him; that, as follows therefrom, it is
only in relation to communal and gregarious utility that it is finely
developed; and that consequently each of us, in spite of the best
intention of _understanding_ himself as individually as possible, and of
"knowing himself," will always just call into consciousness the
non-individual in him, namely, his "averageness";—that our thought
itself is continuously as it were _outvoted_ by the character of
consciousness—by the imperious "genius of the species" therein—and is
translated back into the perspective of the herd. Fundamentally our
actions are in an incomparable manner altogether personal, unique and
absolutely individual—there is no doubt about it; but as soon as we
translate them into consciousness, they _do not appear so any
longer_.... This is the proper phenomenalism and perspectivism as I
understand it: the nature of _animal consciousness_ involves the notion
that the world of which we can become conscious is only a superficial
and symbolic world, a generalised and vulgarised world;—that everything
which becomes conscious _becomes_ just thereby shallow, meagre,
relatively stupid,—a generalisation, a symbol, a characteristic of the
herd; that with the evolving of consciousness there is always combined a
great, radical perversion, falsification, superficialisation, and
generalisation. Finally, the growing consciousness is a danger, and
whoever lives among the most conscious Europeans knows even that it is a
disease. As may be conjectured, it is not the antithesis of subject and
object with which I am here concerned: I leave that distinction to the
epistemologists who have remained entangled in the toils of grammar
(popular metaphysics). It is still less the antithesis of "thing in
itself" and phenomenon, for we do not "know" enough to be entitled even
_to make such a distinction_. Indeed, we have not any organ at all for
_knowing_ or for "truth"; we "know" (or believe, or fancy) just as much
as may be _of use_ in the interest of the human herd, the species; and
even what is here called "usefulness" is ultimately only a belief, a
fancy, and perhaps precisely the most fatal stupidity by which we shall
one day be ruined.


                                  355.

_The Origin of our Conception of "Knowledge."_—I take this explanation
from the street. I heard one of the people saying that "he knew me,"
so I asked myself: What do the people really understand by knowledge?
What do they want when they seek "knowledge"? Nothing more than that
what is strange is to be traced back to something _known_. And we
philosophers—have we really understood _anything more_ by knowledge?
The known, that is to say, what we are accustomed to, so that we no
longer marvel at it, the commonplace, any kind of rule to which we are
habituated, all and everything in which we know ourselves to be at
home:—what? is our need of knowing not just this need of the known?
the will to discover in everything strange, unusual, or questionable,
something which no longer disquiets us? Is it not possible that it
should be the _instinct of fear_ which enjoins upon us to know? Is it
not possible that the rejoicing of the discerner should be just his
rejoicing in the regained feeling of security?... One philosopher
imagined the world "known" when he had traced it back to the "idea":
alas, was it not because the idea was so known, so familiar to him?
because he had so much less fear of the "idea"—Oh, this moderation of
the discerners! let us but look at their principles, and at their
solutions of the riddle of the world in this connection! When they
again find aught in things, among things, or behind things, that is
unfortunately very well known to us, for example, our multiplication
table, or our logic, or our willing and desiring, how happy they
immediately are! For "what is known is understood": they are unanimous
as to that. Even the most circumspect among them think that the known
is at least _more easily understood_ than the strange; that for
example, it is methodically ordered to proceed outward from the "inner
world," from "the facts of consciousness," because it is the world
which is _better known to us_! Error of errors! The known is the
accustomed, and the accustomed is the most difficult of all to
"understand," that is to say, to perceive as a problem, to perceive as
strange, distant, "outside of us."... The great certainty of the
natural sciences in comparison with psychology and the criticism of
the elements of consciousness—_unnatural_ sciences as one might almost
be entitled to call them—rests precisely on the fact that they take
_what is strange_ as their object: while it is almost like something
contradictory and absurd _to wish_ to take generally what is not
strange as an object....


                                  356.

_In what Manner Europe will always become "more Artistic."_—Providing a
living still enforces even in the present day (in our transition period
when so much ceases to enforce) a definite _rôle_ on almost all male
Europeans, their so-called callings; some have the liberty, an apparent
liberty, to choose this rôle themselves, but most have it chosen for
them. The result is strange enough. Almost all Europeans confound
themselves with their rôle when they advance in age; they themselves are
the victims of their "good acting," they have forgotten how much chance,
whim and arbitrariness swayed them when their "calling" was decided—and
how many other rôles they _could_ perhaps have played: for it is now too
late! Looked at more closely, we see that their characters have actually
_evolved_ out of their rôle, nature out of art. There were ages in which
people believed with unshaken confidence, yea, with piety, in their
predestination for this very business, for that very mode of livelihood,
and would not at all acknowledge chance, or the fortuitous rôle, or
arbitrariness therein. Ranks, guilds, and hereditary trade privileges
succeeded, with the help of this belief, in rearing those extraordinary
broad towers of society which distinguished the Middle Ages, and of
which at all events one thing remains to their credit: capacity for
duration (and duration is a value of the first rank on earth!). But
there are ages entirely the reverse, the properly democratic ages, in
which people tend to become more and more oblivious of this conviction,
and a sort of impudent conviction and quite contrary mode of viewing
things comes to the front, the Athenian conviction which is first
observed in the epoch of Pericles, the American conviction of the
present day, which wants also more and more to become an European
conviction, whereby the individual is convinced that he can do almost
anything, that he _can play almost any rôle_, whereby everyone makes
experiments with himself, improvises, tries anew, tries with delight,
whereby all nature ceases and becomes art.... The Greeks, having adopted
this _rôle-creed_—an artist creed, if you will—underwent step by step,
as is well known, a curious transformation, not in every respect worthy
of imitation: _they became actual stage-players_; and as such they
enchanted, they conquered all the world, and at last even the conqueror
of the world, (for the _Graeculus histrio_ conquered Rome, and _not_
Greek culture, as the naïve are accustomed to say....) What I fear,
however, and what is at present obvious, if we desire to perceive it, is
that we modern men are quite on the same road already; and whenever man
begins to discover in what respect he plays a rôle, and to what extent
he _can_ be a stage-player, he _becomes_ a stage-player.... A new flora
and fauna of men thereupon springs up, which cannot grow in more stable,
more restricted eras—or is left "at the bottom," under the ban and
suspicion of infamy—, thereupon the most interesting and insane periods
of history always make their appearance, in which "stage-players," _all_
kinds of stage-players, are the real masters. Precisely thereby another
species of man is always more and more injured, and in the end made
impossible: above all the great "architects"; the building power is now
being paralysed; the courage that makes plans for the distant future is
disheartened; there begins to be a lack of organising geniuses. Who is
there who would now venture to undertake works for the completion of
which millenniums would have to be _reckoned_ upon? The fundamental
belief is dying out, on the basis of which one could calculate, promise
and anticipate the future in one's plan, and offer it as a sacrifice
thereto, that in fact man has only value and significance in so far as
he is _a stone in a great building_; for which purpose he has first of
all to be _solid_, he has to be a "stone."... Above all, not
a—stage-player! In short—alas! this fact will be hushed up for some
considerable time to come!—that which from henceforth will no longer be
built, and _can_ no longer be built, is—a society in the old sense of
the term; to build this structure everything is lacking, above all, the
material. _None of us are any longer material for a society_: that is a
truth which is seasonable at present! It seems to me a matter of
indifference that meanwhile the most short-sighted, perhaps the most
honest, and at any rate the noisiest species of men of the present day,
our friends the Socialists, believe, hope, dream, and above all scream
and scribble almost the opposite; in fact one already reads their
watchword of the future: "free society," on all tables and walls. Free
society? Indeed! Indeed! But you know, gentlemen, sure enough whereof
one builds it? Out of wooden iron! Out of the famous wooden iron! And
not even out of wooden....


                                  357.

_The old Problem: "What is German?"_—Let us count up apart the real
acquisitions of philosophical thought for which we have to thank German
intellects: are they in any allowable sense to be counted also to the
credit of the whole race? Can we say that they are at the same time the
work of the "German soul," or at least a symptom of it, in the sense in
which we are accustomed to think, for example, of Plato's ideomania, his
almost religious madness for form, as an event and an evidence of the
"Greek soul"? Or would the reverse perhaps be true? Were they so
individual, so much an exception to the spirit of the race, as was, for
example, Goethe's Paganism with a good conscience? Or as Bismarck's
Macchiavelism was with a good conscience, his so-called "practical
politics" in Germany? Did our philosophers perhaps even go counter to
the _need_ of the "German soul"? In short, were the German philosophers
really philosophical _Germans_?—I call to mind three cases. Firstly,
_Leibnitz's_ incomparable insight—with which he obtained the advantage
not only over Descartes, but over all who had philosophised up to his
time,—that consciousness is only an accident of mental representation,
and _not_ its necessary and essential attribute; that consequently what
we call consciousness only constitutes a state of our spiritual and
psychical world (perhaps a morbid state), and is _far from being that
world itself_:—is there anything German in this thought, the profundity
of which has not as yet been exhausted? Is there reason to think that a
person of the Latin race would not readily have stumbled on this
reversal of the apparent?—for it is a reversal. Let us call to mind
secondly, the immense note of interrogation which _Kant_ wrote after the
notion of causality. Not that he at all doubted its legitimacy, like
Hume: on the contrary, he began cautiously to define the domain within
which this notion has significance generally (we have not even yet got
finished with the marking out of these limits). Let us take thirdly, the
astonishing hit of _Hegel_, who stuck at no logical usage or
fastidiousness when he ventured to teach that the conceptions of kinds
develop _out of one another_: with which theory the thinkers in Europe
were prepared for the last great scientific movement, for Darwinism—for
without Hegel there would have been no Darwin. Is there anything German
in this Hegelian innovation which first introduced the decisive
conception of evolution into science? Yes, without doubt we feel that
there is something of ourselves "discovered" and divined in all three
cases; we are thankful for it, and at the same time surprised; each of
these three principles is a thoughtful piece of German self-confession,
self-understanding, and self-knowledge. We feel with Leibnitz that "our
inner world is far richer, ampler, and more concealed"; as Germans we
are doubtful, like Kant, about the ultimate validity of scientific
knowledge of nature, and in general about whatever _can_ be known
_causaliter_: the _knowable_ as such now appears to us of _less_ worth.
We Germans should still have been Hegelians, even though there had never
been a Hegel, inasmuch as we (in contradistinction to all Latin peoples)
instinctively attribute to becoming, to evolution, a profounder
significance and higher value than to that which "is"—we hardly believe
at all in the validity of the concept "being." This is all the more the
case because we are not inclined to concede to our human logic that it
is logic in itself, that it is the only kind of logic (we should rather
like, on the contrary, to convince ourselves that it is only a special
case, and perhaps one of the strangest and most stupid). A fourth
question would be whether also _Schopenhauer_ with his Pessimism, that
is to say the problem of _the worth of existence_, had to be a German. I
think not. The event _after_ which this problem was to be expected with
certainty, so that an astronomer of the soul could have calculated the
day and the hour for it—namely, the decay of the belief in the Christian
God, the victory of scientific atheism,—is a universal European event,
in which all races are to have their share of service and honour. On the
contrary, it has to be ascribed precisely to the Germans—those with whom
Schopenhauer was contemporary,—that they delayed this victory of atheism
longest, and endangered it most. Hegel especially was its retarder _par
excellence_, in virtue of the grandiose attempt which he made to
persuade us of the divinity of existence, with the help at the very last
of our sixth sense, "the historical sense." As philosopher, Schopenhauer
was the _first_ avowed and inflexible atheist we Germans have had: his
hostility to Hegel had here its background. The non-divinity of
existence was regarded by him as something understood, palpable,
indisputable; he always lost his philosophical composure and got into a
passion when he saw anyone hesitate and beat about the bush here. It is
at this point that his thorough uprightness of character comes in:
unconditional, honest atheism is precisely the _preliminary condition_
for his raising the problem, as a final and hardwon victory of the
European conscience, as the most prolific act of two thousand years'
discipline to truth, which in the end no longer tolerates the _lie_ of
the belief in a God.... One sees what has really gained the victory over
the Christian God—, Christian morality itself, the conception of
veracity, taken ever more strictly, the confessional subtlety of the
Christian conscience, translated and sublimated to the scientific
conscience, to intellectual purity at any price. To look upon nature as
if it were a proof of the goodness and care of a God; to interpret
history in honour of a divine reason, as a constant testimony to a moral
order in the world and a moral final purpose; to explain personal
experiences as pious men have long enough explained them, as if
everything were a dispensation or intimation of Providence, something
planned and sent on behalf of the salvation of the soul: all that is now
_past_, it has conscience _against_ it, it is regarded by all the more
acute consciences as disreputable and dishonourable, as mendaciousness,
femininism, weakness, and cowardice,—by virtue of this severity, if by
anything, we are _good_ Europeans, the heirs of Europe's longest and
bravest self-conquest. When we thus reject the Christian interpretation,
and condemn its "significance" as a forgery, we are immediately
confronted in a striking manner with the _Schopenhauerian_ question:
_Has existence then a significance at all?_—the question which will
require a couple of centuries even to be completely heard in all its
profundity. Schopenhauer's own answer to this question was—if I may be
forgiven for saying so—a premature, juvenile reply, a mere compromise, a
stoppage and sticking in the very same Christian-ascetic, moral
perspectives, _the belief in which had got notice to quit_ along with
the belief in God.... But he _raised_ the question—as a good European,
as we have said, and _not_ as a German.—Or did the Germans prove at
least by the way in which they seized on the Schopenhauerian question,
their inner connection and relationship to him, their preparation for
his problem, and their _need_ of it? That there has been thinking and
printing even in Germany since Schopenhauer's time on the problem raised
by him,—it was late enough!—does not at all suffice to enable us to
decide in favour of this closer relationship; one could, on the
contrary, lay great stress on the peculiar _awkwardness_ of this
post-Schopenhauerian Pessimism—Germans evidently do not behave
themselves there as in their element. I do not at all allude here to
Eduard von Hartmann; on the contrary, my old suspicion is not vanished
even at present that he is _too clever_ for us; I mean to say that as
arrant rogue from the very first, he did not perhaps make merry solely
over German Pessimism—and that in the end he might probably "bequeathe"
to them the truth as to how far a person could bamboozle the Germans
themselves in the age of bubble companies. But further, are we perhaps
to reckon to the honour of Germans, the old humming-top, Bahnsen, who
all his life spun about with the greatest pleasure around his
realistically dialectic misery and "personal ill-luck,"—was _that_
German? (In passing I recommend his writings for the purpose for which I
myself have used them, as anti-pessimistic fare, especially on account
of his _elegantia psychologica_, which, it seems to me, could alleviate
even the most constipated body and soul). Or would it be proper to count
such dilettanti and old maids as the mawkish apostle of virginity,
Mainländer, among the genuine Germans? After all he was probably a Jew
(all Jews become mawkish when they moralise). Neither Bahnsen, nor
Mainländer, nor even Eduard von Hartmann, give us a reliable grasp of
the question whether the pessimism of Schopenhauer (his frightened
glance into an undeified world, which has become stupid, blind, deranged
and problematic, his _honourable_ fright) was not only an exceptional
case among Germans, but a _German_ event: while everything else which
stands in the foreground, like our valiant politics and our joyful
Jingoism (which decidedly enough regards everything with reference to a
principle sufficiently unphilosophical: "_Deutschland, Deutschland, über
Alles_,"[12] consequently _sub specie speciei_, namely, the German
_species_), testifies very plainly to the contrary. No! The Germans of
to-day are _not_ pessimists! And Schopenhauer was a pessimist, I repeat
it once more, as a good European, and _not_ as a German.


                                  358.

_The Peasant Revolt of the Spirit._—We Europeans find ourselves in view
of an immense world of ruins, where some things still tower aloft, while
other objects stand mouldering and dismal, where most things however
already lie on the ground, picturesque enough—where were there ever
finer ruins?—overgrown with weeds, large and small. It is the Church
which is this city of decay: we see the religious organisation of
Christianity shaken to its deepest foundations. The belief in God is
overthrown, the belief in the Christian ascetic ideal is now fighting
its last fight. Such a long and solidly built work as Christianity—it
was the last construction of the Romans!—could not of course be
demolished all at once; every sort of earthquake had to shake it, every
sort of spirit which perforates, digs, gnaws and moulders had to assist
in the work of destruction. But that which is strangest is that those
who have exerted themselves most to retain and preserve Christianity,
have been precisely those who did most to destroy it,—the Germans. It
seems that the Germans do not understand the essence of a Church. Are
they not spiritual enough, or not distrustful enough to do so? In any
case the structure of the Church rests on a _southern_ freedom and
liberality of spirit, and similarly on a southern suspicion of nature,
man, and spirit,—it rests on a knowledge of man, an experience of man,
entirely different from what the north has had. The Lutheran Reformation
in all its length and breadth was the indignation of the simple against
something "complicated." To speak cautiously, it was a coarse, honest
misunderstanding, in which much is to be forgiven,—people did not
understand the mode of expression of a _victorious_ Church, and only saw
corruption; they misunderstood the noble scepticism, the _luxury_ of
scepticism and toleration which every victorious, self-confident power
permits.... One overlooks the fact readily enough at present that as
regards all cardinal questions concerning power Luther was badly
endowed; he was fatally short-sighted, superficial and imprudent—and
above all, as a man sprung from the people, he lacked all the hereditary
qualities of a ruling caste, and all the instincts for power; so that
his work, his intention to restore the work of the Romans, merely became
involuntarily and unconsciously the commencement of a work of
destruction. He unravelled, he tore asunder with honest rage, where the
old spider had woven longest and most carefully. He gave the sacred
books into the hands of everyone,—they thereby got at last into the
hands of the philologists, that is to say, the annihilators of every
belief based upon books. He demolished the conception of "the Church" in
that he repudiated the belief in the inspiration of the Councils: for
only under the supposition that the inspiring spirit which had founded
the Church still lives in it, still builds it, still goes on building
its house, does the conception of "the Church" retain its power. He gave
back to the priest sexual intercourse: but three-fourths of the
reverence of which the people (and above all the women of the people)
are capable, rests on the belief that an exceptional man in this respect
will also be an exceptional man in other respects. It is precisely here
that the popular belief in something superhuman in man, in a miracle, in
the saving God in man, has its most subtle and insidious advocate. After
Luther had given a wife to the priest, he had _to take from him_
auricular confession; that was psychologically right: but thereby he
practically did away with the Christian priest himself, whose
profoundest utility has ever consisted in his being a sacred ear, a
silent well, and a grave for secrets. "Every man his own priest"—behind
such formulæ and their bucolic slyness, there was concealed in Luther
the profoundest hatred of "higher men" and the rule of "higher men," as
the Church had conceived them. Luther disowned an ideal which he did not
know how to attain, while he seemed to combat and detest the
degeneration thereof. As a matter of fact, he, the impossible monk,
repudiated the _rule_ of the _homines religiosi_; he consequently
brought about precisely the same thing within the ecclesiastical social
order that he combated so impatiently in the civic order,—namely a
"peasant insurrection."—As to all that grew out of his Reformation
afterwards, good and bad, which can at present be almost counted up,—who
would be naïve enough to praise or blame Luther simply on account of
these results? He is innocent of all; he knew not what he did. The art
of making the European spirit shallower, especially in the north, or
more _good-natured_, if people would rather hear it designated by a
moral expression, undoubtedly took a clever step in advance in the
Lutheran Reformation; and similarly there grew out of it the mobility
and disquietude of the spirit, its thirst for independence, its belief
in the right to freedom, and its "naturalness." If people wish to
ascribe to the Reformation in the last instance the merit of having
prepared and favoured that which we at present honour as "modern
science," they must of course add that it is also accessory to bringing
about the degeneration of the modern scholar with his lack of reverence,
of shame and of profundity; and that it is also responsible for all
naïve candour and plain-dealing in matters of knowledge, in short for
the _plebeianism of the spirit_ which is peculiar to the last two
centuries, and from which even pessimism hitherto, has not in any way
delivered us. "Modern ideas" also belong to this peasant insurrection of
the north against the colder, more ambiguous, more suspicious spirit of
the south, which has built itself its greatest monument in the Christian
Church. Let us not forget in the end what a Church is, and especially,
in contrast to every "State": a Church is above all an authoritative
organisation which secures to the _most spiritual_ men the highest rank,
and _believes_ in the power of spirituality so far as to forbid all
grosser appliances of authority. Through this alone the Church is under
all circumstances a _nobler_ institution than the State.—


                                  359.

_Vengeance on Intellect and other Backgrounds of
Morality._—Morality—where do you think it has its most dangerous and
rancorous advocates?—There, for example, is an ill-constituted man, who
does not possess enough of intellect to be able to take pleasure in it,
and just enough of culture to be aware of the fact; bored, satiated, and
a self-despiser; besides being cheated unfortunately by some hereditary
property out of the last consolation, the "blessing of labour," the
self-forgetfulness in the "day's work"; one who is thoroughly ashamed of
his existence—perhaps also harbouring some vices,—and who on the other
hand (by means of books to which he has no right, or more intellectual
society than he can digest), cannot help vitiating himself more and
more, and making himself vain and irritable: such a thoroughly poisoned
man—for intellect becomes poison, culture becomes poison, possession
becomes poison, solitude becomes poison, to such ill-constituted
beings—gets at last into a habitual state of vengeance and inclination
to vengeance.... What do you think he finds necessary, absolutely
necessary in order to give himself the appearance in his own eyes of
superiority over more intellectual men, so as to give himself the
delight of _perfect revenge_, at least in imagination? It is always
_morality_ that he requires, one may wager on it; always the big moral
words, always the high-sounding words: justice, wisdom, holiness,
virtue; always the stoicism of gestures (how well stoicism hides what
one does _not_ possess!); always the mantle of wise silence, of
affability, of gentleness, and whatever else the idealist-mantle is
called in which the incurable self-despisers and also the incurably
conceited walk about. Let me not be misunderstood: out of such born
_enemies of the spirit_ there arises now and then that rare specimen of
humanity who is honoured by the people under the name of saint or sage:
it is out of such men that there arise those prodigies of morality that
make a noise, that make history,—St Augustine was one of these men. Fear
of the intellect, vengeance on the intellect—Oh! how often have these
powerfully impelling vices become the root of virtues! Yea, virtue
_itself_!—And asking the question among ourselves, even the
philosopher's pretension to wisdom, which has occasionally been made
here and there on the earth, the maddest and most immodest of all
pretensions,—has it not always been, in India as well as in Greece,
_above all a means of concealment_? Sometimes, perhaps, from the point
of view of education which hallows so many lies, it has been a tender
regard for growing and evolving persons, for disciples who have often to
be guarded against themselves by means of the belief in a person (by
means of an error). In most cases, however, it is a means of concealment
for a philosopher, behind which he seeks protection, owing to
exhaustion, age, chilliness, or hardening; as a feeling of the
approaching end, as the sagacity of the instinct which animals have
before their death,—they go apart, remain at rest, choose solitude,
creep into caves, become _wise_.... What? Wisdom a means of concealment
of the philosopher from—intellect?—


                                  360.

_Two Kinds of Causes which are Confounded._—It seems to me one of my
most essential steps and advances that I have learned to distinguish the
cause of the action generally from the cause of action in a particular
manner, say, in this direction, with this aim. The first kind of cause
is a quantum of stored-up force, which waits to be used in some manner,
for some purpose; the second kind of cause, on the contrary, is
something quite unimportant in comparison with the first, an
insignificant hazard for the most part, in conformity with which the
quantum of force in question "discharges" itself in some unique and
definite manner: the lucifer-match in relation to the barrel of
gunpowder. Among those insignificant hazards and lucifer-matches I count
all the so-called "aims," and similarly the still more so-called
"occupations" of people: they are relatively optional, arbitrary, and
almost indifferent in relation to the immense quantum of force which
presses on, as we have said, to be used up in any way whatever. One
generally looks at the matter in a different manner: one is accustomed
to see the _impelling_ force precisely in the aim (object, calling,
&c.), according to a primeval error,—but it is only the _directing_
force; the steersman and the steam have thereby been confounded. And yet
it is not even always the steersman, the directing force.... Is the
"aim," the "purpose," not often enough only an extenuating pretext, an
additional self-blinding of conceit, which does not wish it to be said
that the ship _follows_ the stream into which it has accidentally run?
That it "wishes" to go that way, _because_ it _must_ go that way? That
it has a direction, sure enough, but—not a steersman? We still require a
criticism of the conception of "purpose."


                                  361.

_The Problem of the Actor._—The problem of the actor has disquieted me
the longest; I was uncertain (and am sometimes so still) whether one
could not get at the dangerous conception of "artist"—a conception
hitherto treated with unpardonable leniency—from this point of view.
Falsity with a good conscience; delight in dissimulation breaking forth
as power, pushing aside, overflowing, and sometimes extinguishing the
so-called "character"; the inner longing to play a rôle, to assume a
mask, to put on an _appearance_; a surplus of capacity for adaptations
of every kind, which can no longer gratify themselves in the service of
the nearest and narrowest utility: all that perhaps does not pertain
_solely_ to the actor in himself?... Such an instinct would develop most
readily in families of the lower class of the people, who have had to
pass their lives in absolute dependence, under shifting pressure and
constraint, who (to accommodate themselves to their conditions, to adapt
themselves always to new circumstances) had again and again to pass
themselves off and represent themselves as different persons,—thus
having gradually qualified themselves to adjust the mantle to _every_
wind, thereby almost becoming the mantle itself, as masters of the
embodied and incarnated art of eternally playing the game of hide and
seek, which one calls _mimicry_ among the animals:—until at last this
ability, stored up from generation to generation, has become
domineering, irrational and intractable, till as instinct it begins to
command the other instincts, and begets the actor, the "artist" (the
buffoon, the pantaloon, the Jack-Pudding, the fool, and the clown in the
first place, also the classical type of servant, Gil Blas: for in such
types one has the precursors of the artist, and often enough even of the
"genius"). Also under higher social conditions there grows under similar
pressure a similar species of men. Only the histrionic instinct is there
for the most part held strictly in check by another instinct, for
example, among "diplomatists";—for the rest, I should think that it
would always be open to a good diplomatist to become a good actor on the
stage, provided his dignity "allowed" it. As regards the _Jews_,
however, the adaptable people _par excellence_, we should, in conformity
to this line of thought, expect to see among them a world-historical
institution from the very beginning, for the rearing of actors, a
genuine breeding-place for actors; and in fact the question is very
pertinent just now: what good actor at present is _not_—a Jew? The Jew
also, as a born literary man, as the actual ruler of the European press,
exercises this power on the basis of his histrionic capacity: for the
literary man is essentially an actor,—he plays the part of "expert," of
"specialist."—Finally _women_. If we consider the whole history of
women, are they not _obliged_ first of all, and above all to be
actresses? If we listen to doctors who have hypnotised women, or,
finally, if we love them—and let ourselves be "hypnotised" by them,—what
is always divulged thereby? That they "give themselves airs," even when
they—"give themselves."... Woman is so artistic....


                                  362.

_My Belief in the Virilising of Europe._—We owe it to Napoleon (and not
at all to the French Revolution, which had in view the "fraternity" of
the nations, and the florid interchange of good graces among people
generally) that several warlike centuries, which have not had their like
in past history, may now follow one another—in short, that we have
entered upon _the classical age of war_, war at the same time scientific
and popular, on the grandest scale (as regards means, talents and
discipline), to which all coming millenniums will look back with envy
and awe as a work of perfection:—for the national movement out of which
this martial glory springs, is only the counter-_choc_ against Napoleon,
and would not have existed without him. To him, consequently, one will
one day be able to attribute the fact that _man_ in Europe has again got
the upper hand of the merchant and the Philistine; perhaps even of
"woman" also, who has become pampered owing to Christianity and the
extravagant spirit of the eighteenth century, and still more owing to
"modern ideas." Napoleon, who saw in modern ideas, and accordingly in
civilisation, something like a personal enemy, has by this hostility
proved himself one of the greatest continuators of the Renaissance: he
has brought to the surface a whole block of the ancient character, the
decisive block perhaps, the block of granite. And who knows but that
this block of ancient character will in the end get the upper hand of
the national movement, and will have to make itself in a _positive_
sense the heir and continuator of Napoleon:—who, as one knows, wanted
_one_ Europe, which was to be _mistress of the world_.—


                                  363.

_How each Sex has its Prejudice about Love._—Notwithstanding all the
concessions which I am inclined to make to the monogamic prejudice, I
will never admit that we should speak of _equal_ rights in the love of
man and woman: there are no such equal rights. The reason is that man
and woman understand something different by the term love,—and it
belongs to the conditions of love in both sexes that the one sex does
_not_ presuppose the same feeling, the same conception of "love," in the
other sex. What woman understands by love is clear enough: complete
surrender (not merely devotion) of soul and body, without any motive,
without any reservation, rather with shame and terror at the thought of
a devotion restricted by clauses or associated with conditions. In this
absence of conditions her love is precisely a _faith_: woman has no
other.—Man, when he loves a woman, _wants_ precisely this love from her;
he is consequently, as regards himself, furthest removed from the
prerequisites of feminine love; granted, however, that there should also
be men to whom on their side the demand for complete devotion is not
unfamiliar,—well, they are really—not men. A man who loves like a woman
becomes thereby a slave; a woman, however, who loves like a woman
becomes thereby a _more perfect_ woman.... The passion of woman in its
unconditional renunciation of its own rights presupposes in fact that
there does _not_ exist on the other side an equal _pathos_, an equal
desire for renunciation: for if both renounced themselves out of love,
there would result—well, I don't know what, perhaps a _horror vacui_?
Woman wants to be taken and accepted as a possession, she wishes to be
merged in the conceptions of "possession" and "possessed"; consequently
she wants one who _takes_, who does not offer and give himself away, but
who reversely is rather to be made richer in "himself"—by the increase
of power, happiness and faith which the woman herself gives to him.
Woman gives herself, man takes her.—I do not think one will get over
this natural contrast by any social contract, or with the very best will
to do justice, however desirable it may be to avoid bringing the severe,
frightful, enigmatical, and unmoral elements of this antagonism
constantly before our eyes. For love, regarded as complete, great, and
full, is nature, and as nature, is to all eternity something
"unmoral."—_Fidelity_ is accordingly included in woman's love, it
follows from the definition thereof; with man fidelity _may_ readily
result in consequence of his love, perhaps as gratitude or idiosyncrasy
of taste, and so-called elective affinity, but it does not belong to the
_essence_ of his love—and indeed so little, that one might almost be
entitled to speak of a natural opposition between love and fidelity in
man, whose love is just a desire to possess, and _not_ a renunciation
and giving away; the desire to possess, however, comes to an end every
time with the possession.... As a matter of fact it is the more subtle
and jealous thirst for possession in the man (who is rarely and tardily
convinced of having this "possession"), which makes his love continue;
in that case it is even possible that the love may increase after the
surrender,—he does not readily own that a woman has nothing more to
"surrender" to him.—


                                  364.

_The Anchorite Speaks._—The art of associating with men rests
essentially on one's skilfulness (which presupposes long exercise) in
accepting a repast, in taking a repast in the cuisine of which one has
no confidence. Provided one comes to the table with the hunger of a wolf
everything is easy ("the worst society gives thee _experience_"—as
Mephistopheles says); but one has not got this wolf's-hunger when one
needs it! Alas! how difficult are our fellow-men to digest! First
principle: to stake one's courage as in a misfortune, to seize boldly,
to admire oneself at the same time, to take one's repugnance between
one's teeth, to cram down one's disgust. Second principle: to "improve"
one's fellow-man, by praise for example, so that he may begin to sweat
out his self-complacency; or to seize a tuft of his good or
"interesting" qualities, and pull at it till one gets his whole virtue
out, and can put him under the folds of it. Third principle:
self-hypnotism. To fix one's eye on the object of one's intercourse, as
on a glass knob, until, ceasing to feel pleasure or pain thereat, one
falls asleep unobserved, becomes rigid, and acquires a fixed pose: a
household recipe used in married life and in friendship, well tested and
prized as indispensable, but not yet scientifically formulated. Its
proper name is—patience.—


                                  365.

_The Anchorite Speaks once more._—We also have intercourse with "men,"
we also modestly put on the clothes in which people know us (_as such_),
respect us and seek us; and we thereby mingle in society, that is to
say, among the disguised who do not wish to be so called; we also do
like all prudent masqueraders, and courteously dismiss all curiosity
which has not reference merely to our "clothes." There are however other
modes and artifices for "going about" among men and associating with
them: for example, as a ghost,—which is very advisable when one wants to
scare them, and get rid of them easily. An example: a person grasps at
us, and is unable to seize us. That frightens him. Or we enter by a
closed door. Or when the lights are extinguished. Or after we are dead.
The latter is the artifice of _posthumous_ men _par excellence_.
("What?" said such a one once impatiently, "do you think we should
delight in enduring this strangeness, coldness, death-stillness about
us, all this subterranean, hidden, dim, undiscovered solitude, which is
called life with us, and might just as well be called death, if we were
not conscious of what _will arise_ out of us,—and that only after our
death shall we attain to _our_ life and become living, ah! very living!
we posthumous men!"—)


                                  366.

_At the Sight of a Learned Book._—We do not belong to those who only get
their thoughts from books, or at the prompting of books,—it is our
custom to think in the open air, walking, leaping, climbing, or dancing
on lonesome mountains by preference, or close to the sea, where even the
paths become thoughtful. Our first question concerning the value of a
book, a man, or a piece of music is: Can it walk? or still better: Can
it dance?... We seldom read; we do not read the worse for that—oh, how
quickly do we divine how a person has arrived at his thoughts:—whether
sitting before an ink-bottle with compressed belly and head bent over
the paper: oh, how quickly we are then done with his book! The
constipated bowels betray themselves, one may wager on it, just as the
atmosphere of the room, the ceiling of the room, the smallness of the
room, betray themselves.—These were my feelings as I was closing a
straightforward, learned book, thankful, very thankful, but also
relieved.... In the book of a learned man there is almost always
something oppressive and oppressed: the "specialist" comes to light
somewhere, his ardour, his seriousness, his wrath, his over-estimation
of the nook in which he sits and spins, his hump—every specialist has
his hump. A learned book also always mirrors a distorted soul: every
trade distorts. Look at our friends again with whom we have spent our
youth, after they have taken possession of their science: alas! how the
reverse has always taken place! Alas! how they themselves are now for
ever occupied and possessed by their science! Grown into their nook,
crumpled into unrecognisability, constrained, deprived of their
equilibrium, emaciated and angular everywhere, perfectly round only in
one place,—we are moved and silent when we find them so. Every
handicraft, granting even that it has a golden floor,[13] has also a
leaden ceiling above it, which presses and presses on the soul, till it
is pressed into a strange and distorted shape. There is nothing to alter
here. We need not think that it is at all possible to obviate this
disfigurement by any educational artifice whatever. Every kind of
_perfection_ is purchased at a high price on earth, where everything is
perhaps purchased too dear; one is an expert in one's department at the
price of being also a victim of one's department. But you want to have
it otherwise—"more reasonable," above all more convenient—is it not so,
my dear contemporaries? Very well! But then you will also immediately
get something different: that is to say, instead of the craftsman and
expert, the literary man, the versatile, "many-sided" littérateur, who
to be sure lacks the hump—not taking account of the hump or bow which he
makes before you as the shopman of the intellect and the "porter" of
culture—, the littérateur, who _is_ really nothing, but "represents"
almost everything: he plays and "represents" the expert, he also takes
it upon himself in all modesty _to see that he is_ paid, honoured and
celebrated in this position.—No, my learned friends! I bless you even on
account of your humps! And also because like me you despise the
littérateurs and parasites of culture! And because you do not know how
to make merchandise of your intellect! And have so many opinions which
cannot be expressed in money value! And because you do not represent
anything which you _are_ not! Because your sole desire is to become
masters of your craft; because you reverence every kind of mastership
and ability, and repudiate with the most relentless scorn everything of
a make-believe, half-genuine, dressed-up, virtuoso, demagogic,
histrionic nature in _litteris et artibus_—all that which does not
convince you by its absolute _genuineness_ of discipline and preparatory
training, or cannot stand your test! (Even genius does not help a person
to get over such a defect, however well it may be able to deceive with
regard to it: one understands this if one has once looked closely at our
most gifted painters and musicians,—who almost without exception, can
artificially and supplementarily appropriate to themselves (by means of
artful inventions of style, make-shifts, and even principles), the
_appearance_ of that genuineness, that solidity of training and culture;
to be sure, without thereby deceiving themselves, without thereby
imposing perpetual silence on their bad consciences. For you know well
enough that all great modern artists suffer from bad consciences?...)


                                  367.

_How one has to Distinguish first of all in Works of Art._—Everything
that is thought, versified, painted and composed, yea, even built and
moulded, belongs either to monologic art, or to art before witnesses.
Under the latter there is also to be included the apparently monologic
art which involves the belief in God, the whole lyric of prayer; because
for a pious man there is no solitude,—we, the godless, have been the
first to devise this invention. I know of no profounder distinction in
all the perspective of the artist than this: Whether he looks at his
growing work of art (at "himself—") with the eye of the witness; or
whether he "has forgotten the world," as is the essential thing in all
monologic art,——it rests _on forgetting_, it is the music of forgetting.


                                  368.

_The Cynic Speaks._—My objections to Wagner's music are physiological
objections. Why should I therefore begin by disguising them under
æsthetic formulæ? My "point" is that I can no longer breathe freely when
this music begins to operate on me; my _foot_ immediately becomes
indignant at it and rebels: for what it needs is time, dance and march;
it demands first of all from music the ecstasies which are in _good_
walking, striding, leaping and dancing. But do not my stomach, my heart,
my blood and my bowels also protest? Do I not become hoarse unawares
under its influence? And then I ask myself what it is really that my
body _wants_ from music generally. I believe it wants to have _relief_:
so that all animal functions should be accelerated by means of light,
bold, unfettered, self-assured rhythms; so that brazen, leaden life
should be gilded by means of golden, good, tender harmonies. My
melancholy would fain rest its head in the hiding-places and abysses of
_perfection_: for this reason I need music. What do I care for the
drama! What do I care for the spasms of its moral ecstasies, in which
the "people" have their satisfaction! What do I care for the whole
pantomimic hocus-pocus of the actor!... It will now be divined that I am
essentially anti-theatrical at heart,—but Wagner on the contrary, was
essentially a man of the stage and an actor, the most enthusiastic
mummer-worshipper that has ever existed, even among musicians!... And
let it be said in passing that if Wagner's theory was that "drama is the
object, and music is only the means to it,"—his _practice_ on the
contrary from beginning to end has been to the effect that "attitude is
the object, drama and even music can never be anything else but means to
_that_." Music as a means of elucidating, strengthening and intensifying
dramatic poses and the actor's appeal to the senses, and Wagnerian drama
only an opportunity for a number of dramatic attitudes! Wagner
possessed, along with all other instincts, the dictatorial instinct of a
great actor in all and everything, and as has been said, also as a
musician.—I once made this clear with some trouble to a thorough-going
Wagnerian, and I had reasons for adding:—"Do be a little more honest
with yourself: we are not now in the theatre. In the theatre we are only
honest in the mass; as individuals we lie, we belie even ourselves. We
leave ourselves at home when we go to the theatre; we there renounce the
right to our own tongue and choice, to our taste, and even to our
courage as we possess it and practise it within our own four walls in
relation to God and man. No one takes his finest taste in art into the
theatre with him, not even the artist who works for the theatre: there
one is people, public, herd, woman, Pharisee, voting animal, democrat,
neighbour, and fellow-creature; there even the most personal conscience
succumbs to the levelling charm of the 'great multitude'; there
stupidity operates as wantonness and contagion; there the neighbour
rules, there one _becomes_ a neighbour...." (I have forgotten to mention
what my enlightened Wagnerian answered to my physiological objections:
"So the fact is that you are really not healthy enough for our music?"—)


                                  369.

_Juxtapositions in us._—Must we not acknowledge to ourselves, we
artists, that there is a strange discrepancy in us; that on the one hand
our taste, and on the other hand our creative power, keep apart in an
extraordinary manner, continue apart, and have a separate growth;—I mean
to say that they have entirely different gradations and _tempi_ of age,
youth, maturity, mellowness and rottenness? So that, for example, a
musician could all his life create things which _contradict_ all that
his ear and heart, spoilt as they are for listening, prize, relish and
prefer:—he would not even require to be aware of the contradiction! As
an almost painfully regular experience shows, a person's taste can
easily outgrow the taste of his power, even without the latter being
thereby paralysed or checked in its productivity. The reverse, however,
can also to some extent take place,—and it is to this especially that I
should like to direct the attention of artists. A constant producer, a
man who is a "mother" in the grand sense of the term, one who no longer
knows or hears of anything except pregnancies and child-beds of his
spirit, who has no time at all to reflect and make comparisons with
regard to himself and his work, who is also no longer inclined to
exercise his taste, but simply forgets it, letting it take its chance of
standing, lying or falling,—perhaps such a man at last produces works
_on which he is then not at all fit to pass a judgment_: so that he
speaks and thinks foolishly about them and about himself. This seems to
me almost the normal condition with fruitful artists,—nobody knows a
child worse than its parents—and the rule applies even (to take an
immense example) to the entire Greek world of poetry and art, which was
never "conscious" of what it had done....


                                  370.

_What is Romanticism?_—It will be remembered perhaps, at least among my
friends, that at first I assailed the modern world with some gross
errors and exaggerations, but at any rate with _hope_ in my heart. I
recognised—who knows from what personal experiences?—the philosophical
pessimism of the nineteenth century as the symptom of a higher power of
thought, a more daring courage and a more triumphant _plenitude_ of life
than had been characteristic of the eighteenth century, the age of Hume,
Kant, Condillac, and the sensualists: so that the tragic view of things
seemed to me the peculiar _luxury_ of our culture, its most precious,
noble, and dangerous mode of prodigality; but nevertheless, in view of
its overflowing wealth, a _justifiable_ luxury. In the same way I
interpreted for myself German music as the expression of a Dionysian
power in the German soul: I thought I heard in it the earthquake by
means of which a primeval force that had been imprisoned for ages was
finally finding vent—indifferent as to whether all that usually calls
itself culture was thereby made to totter. It is obvious that I then
misunderstood what constitutes the veritable character both of
philosophical pessimism and of German music,—namely, their
_Romanticism_. What is Romanticism? Every art and every philosophy may
be regarded as a healing and helping appliance in the service of
growing, struggling life: they always presuppose suffering and
sufferers. But there are two kinds of sufferers: on the one hand those
that suffer from _overflowing vitality_, who need Dionysian art, and
require a tragic view and insight into life; and on the other hand those
who suffer from _reduced vitality_, who seek repose, quietness, calm
seas, and deliverance from themselves through art or knowledge, or else
intoxication, spasm, bewilderment and madness. All Romanticism in art
and knowledge responds to the twofold craving of the _latter_; to them
Schopenhauer as well as Wagner responded (and responds),—to name those
most celebrated and decided romanticists who were then _misunderstood_
by me (_not_ however to their disadvantage, as may be reasonably
conceded to me). The being richest in overflowing vitality, the
Dionysian God and man, may not only allow himself the spectacle of the
horrible and questionable, but even the fearful deed itself, and all the
luxury of destruction, disorganisation and negation. With him evil,
senselessness and ugliness seem as it were licensed, in consequence of
the overflowing plenitude of procreative, fructifying power, which can
convert every desert into a luxuriant orchard. Conversely, the greatest
sufferer, the man poorest in vitality, would have most need of mildness,
peace and kindliness in thought and action: he would need, if possible,
a God who is specially the God of the sick, a "Saviour"; similarly he
would have need of logic, the abstract intelligibility of existence—for
logic soothes and gives confidence;—in short he would need a certain
warm, fear-dispelling narrowness and imprisonment within optimistic
horizons. In this manner I gradually began to understand Epicurus, the
opposite of a Dionysian pessimist;—in a similar manner also the
"Christian," who in fact is only a type of Epicurean, and like him
essentially a romanticist:—and my vision has always become keener in
tracing that most difficult and insidious of all forms of _retrospective
inference_, which most mistakes have been made—the inference from the
work to its author, from the deed to its doer, from the ideal to him who
_needs_ it, from every mode of thinking and valuing to the imperative
_want_ behind it.—In regard to all æsthetic values I now avail myself of
this radical distinction: I ask in every single case, "Has hunger or
superfluity become creative here?" At the outset another distinction
might seem to recommend itself more—it is far more conspicuous,—namely,
to have in view whether the desire for rigidity, for perpetuation, for
_being_ is the cause of the creating, or the desire for destruction, for
change, for the new, for the future—for _becoming_. But when looked at
more carefully, both these kinds of desire prove themselves ambiguous,
and are explicable precisely according to the before-mentioned and, as
it seems to me, rightly preferred scheme. The desire for _destruction_,
change and becoming, may be the expression of overflowing power,
pregnant with futurity (my _terminus_ for this is of course the word
"Dionysian"); but it may also be the hatred of the ill-constituted,
destitute and unfortunate, which destroys, and _must_ destroy, because
the enduring, yea, all that endures, in fact all being, excites and
provokes it. To understand this emotion we have but to look closely at
our anarchists. The will to _perpetuation_ requires equally a double
interpretation. It may on the one hand proceed from gratitude and
love:—art of this origin will always be an art of apotheosis, perhaps
dithyrambic, as with Rubens, mocking divinely, as with Hafiz, or clear
and kind-hearted as with Goethe, and spreading a Homeric brightness and
glory over everything (in this case I speak of _Apollonian_ art). It may
also, however, be the tyrannical will of a sorely-suffering, struggling
or tortured being, who would like to stamp his most personal, individual
and narrow characteristics, the very idiosyncrasy of his suffering, as
an obligatory law and constraint on others; who, as it were, takes
revenge on all things, in that he imprints, enforces and brands _his_
image, the image of _his_ torture, upon them. The latter is _romantic
pessimism_ in its most extreme form, whether it be as Schopenhauerian
will-philosophy, or as Wagnerian music:—romantic pessimism, the last
_great_ event in the destiny of our civilisation. (That there _may be_
quite a different kind of pessimism, a classical pessimism—this
presentiment and vision belongs to me, as something inseparable from me,
as my _proprium_ and _ipsissimum_; only that the word "classical" is
repugnant to my ears, it has become far too worn; too indefinite and
indistinguishable. I call that pessimism of the future,—for it is
coming! I see it coming!—_Dionysian_ pessimism.)


                                  371.

_We Unintelligible Ones._—Have we ever complained among ourselves of
being misunderstood, misjudged, and confounded with others; of being
calumniated, misheard, and not heard? That is just our lot—alas, for a
long time yet! say, to be modest, until 1901—, it is also our
distinction; we should not have sufficient respect for ourselves if we
wished it otherwise. People confound us with others—the reason of it is
that we ourselves grow, we change continually, we cast off old bark, we
still slough every spring, we always become younger, higher, stronger,
as men of the future, we thrust our roots always more powerfully into
the deep—into evil—, while at the same time we embrace the heavens ever
more lovingly, more extensively, and suck in their light ever more
eagerly with all our branches and leaves. We grow like trees—that is
difficult to understand, like all life!—not in one place, but
everywhere, not in one direction only, but upwards and outwards, as well
as inwards and downwards. At the same time our force shoots forth in
stem, branches, and roots; we are really no longer free to do anything
separately, or to _be_ anything separately.... Such is our lot, as we
have said: we grow in _height_; and even should it be our calamity—for
we dwell ever closer to the lightning!—well, we honour it none the less
on that account; it is that which we do not wish to share with others,
which we do not wish to bestow upon others, the fate of all elevation,
_our_ fate....


                                  372.

_Why we are not Idealists._—Formerly philosophers were afraid of the
senses: have we, perhaps, been far too forgetful of this fear? We are at
present all of us sensualists, we representatives of the present and of
the future in philosophy,—_not_ according to theory, however, but in
_praxis_, in practice.... Those former philosophers, on the contrary,
thought that the senses lured them out of _their_ world, the cold realm
of "ideas," to a dangerous southern island, where they were afraid that
their philosopher-virtues would melt away like snow in the sun. "Wax in
the ears," was then almost a condition of philosophising; a genuine
philosopher no longer listened to life, in so far as life is music, he
_denied_ the music of life—it is an old philosophical superstition that
all music is Sirens' music.—Now we should be inclined at the present day
to judge precisely in the opposite manner (which in itself might be just
as false), and to regard _ideas_, with their cold, anæmic appearance,
and not even in spite of this appearance, as worse seducers than the
senses. They have always lived on the "blood" of the philosopher, they
always consumed his senses, and indeed, if you will believe me, his
"heart" as well. Those old philosophers were heartless: philosophising
was always a species of vampirism. At the sight of such figures even as
Spinoza, do you not feel a profoundly enigmatical and disquieting sort
of impression? Do you not see the drama which is here performed, the
constantly _increasing pallor_—, the spiritualisation always more
ideally displayed? Do you not imagine some long-concealed blood-sucker
in the background, which makes its beginning with the senses, and in the
end retains or leaves behind nothing but bones and their rattling?—I
mean categories, formulæ, and _words_ (for you will pardon me in saying
that what _remains_ of Spinoza, _amor intellectualis dei_, is rattling
and nothing more! What is _amor_, what is _deus_, when they have lost
every drop of blood?...) _In summa_: all philosophical idealism has
hitherto been something like a disease, where it has not been, as in the
case of Plato, the prudence of superabundant and dangerous
healthfulness, the fear of _overpowerful_ senses, and the wisdom of a
wise Socratic.—Perhaps, is it the case that we moderns are merely not
sufficiently sound _to require_ Plato's idealism? And we do not fear the
senses because——.


                                  373.

_"Science" as Prejudice._—It follows from the laws of class distinction
that the learned, in so far as they belong to the intellectual
middle-class, are debarred from getting even a sight of the really
_great_ problems and notes of interrogation. Besides, their courage, and
similarly their outlook, does not reach so far,—and above all, their
need, which makes them investigators, their innate anticipation and
desire that things should be constituted _in such and such a way_, their
fears and hopes are too soon quieted and set at rest. For example, that
which makes the pedantic Englishman, Herbert Spencer, so enthusiastic in
his way, and impels him to draw a line of hope, a horizon of
desirability, the final reconciliation of "egoism and altruism" of which
he dreams,—that almost causes nausea to people like us:—a humanity with
such Spencerian perspectives as ultimate perspectives would seem to us
deserving of contempt, of extermination! But the _fact_ that something
has to be taken by him as his highest hope, which is regarded, and may
well be regarded, by others merely as a distasteful possibility, is a
note of interrogation which Spencer could not have foreseen.... It is
just the same with the belief with which at present so many
materialistic natural-scientists are content, the belief in a world
which is supposed to have its equivalent and measure in human thinking
and human valuations, a "world of truth" at which we might be able
ultimately to arrive with the help of our insignificant, four-cornered
human reason! What? do we actually wish to have existence debased in
that fashion to a ready-reckoner exercise and calculation for
stay-at-home mathematicians? We should not, above all, seek to divest
existence of its _ambiguous_ character: _good_ taste forbids it,
gentlemen, the taste of reverence for everything that goes beyond your
horizon! That a world-interpretation is alone right by which _you_
maintain your position, by which investigation and work can go on
scientifically in _your_ sense (you really mean _mechanically_?), an
interpretation which acknowledges numbering, calculating, weighing,
seeing and handling, and nothing more—such an idea is a piece of
grossness and naïvety, provided it is not lunacy and idiocy. Would the
reverse not be quite probable, that the most superficial and external
characters of existence—its most apparent quality, its outside, its
embodiment—should let themselves be apprehended first? perhaps alone
allow themselves to be apprehended? A "scientific" interpretation of the
world as you understand it might consequently still be one of the
_stupidest_ that is to say, the most destitute of significance, of all
possible world-interpretations:—I say this in confidence to my friends
the Mechanicians, who to-day like to hobnob with philosophers, and
absolutely believe that mechanics is the teaching of the first and last
laws upon which, as upon a ground-floor, all existence must be built.
But an essentially mechanical world would be an essentially
_meaningless_ world! Supposing we valued the _worth_ of a music with
reference to how much it could be counted, calculated, or formulated—how
absurd such a "scientific" estimate of music would be! What would one
have apprehended, understood, or discerned in it! Nothing, absolutely
nothing of what is really "music" in it!...


                                  374.

_Our new "Infinite."_—How far the perspective character of existence
extends, or whether it have any other character at all, whether an
existence without explanation, without "sense" does not just become
"nonsense," whether, on the other hand, all existence is not essentially
an _explaining_ existence—these questions, as is right and proper,
cannot be determined even by the most diligent and severely
conscientious analysis and self-examination of the intellect, because in
this analysis the human intellect cannot avoid seeing itself in its
perspective forms, and _only_ in them. We cannot see round our corner:
it is hopeless curiosity to want to know what other modes of intellect
and perspective there _might_ be: for example, whether any kind of being
could perceive time backwards, or alternately forwards and backwards (by
which another direction of life and another conception of cause and
effect would be given). But I think that we are to-day at least far from
the ludicrous immodesty of decreeing from our nook that there _can_ only
be legitimate perspectives from that nook. The world, on the contrary,
has once more become "infinite" to us: in so far we cannot dismiss the
possibility that it _contains infinite interpretations_. Once more the
great horror seizes us—but who would desire forthwith to deify once more
_this_ monster of an unknown world in the old fashion? And perhaps
worship _the_ unknown thing as _the_ "unknown person" in future? Ah!
there are too many _ungodly_ possibilities of interpretation comprised
in this unknown, too much devilment, stupidity and folly of
interpretation.—also our own human, all too human interpretation itself,
which we know....


                                  375.

_Why we Seem to be Epicureans._—We are cautious, we modern men, with
regard to final convictions, our distrust lies in wait for the
enchantments and tricks of conscience involved in every strong belief,
in every absolute Yea and Nay: how is this explained? Perhaps one may
see in it a good deal of the caution of the "burnt child," of the
disillusioned idealist; but one may also see in it another and better
element, the joyful curiosity of a former lingerer in the corner, who
has been brought to despair by his nook, and now luxuriates and revels
in its antithesis, in the unbounded, in the "open air in itself." Thus
there is developed an almost Epicurean inclination for knowledge, which
does not readily lose sight of the questionable character of things;
likewise also a repugnance to pompous moral phrases and attitudes, a
taste that repudiates all coarse, square contrasts, and is proudly
conscious of its habitual reserve. For _this too_ constitutes our pride,
this easy tightening of the reins in our headlong impulse after
certainty, this self-control of the rider in his most furious riding:
for now, as of old we have mad, fiery steeds under us, and if we delay,
it is certainly least of all the danger which causes us to delay....


                                  376.

_Our Slow Periods._—It is thus that artists feel, and all men of
"works," the maternal species of men: they always believe at every
chapter of their life—a work always makes a chapter—that they have
already reached the goal itself; they would always patiently accept
death with the feeling: "we are ripe for it." This is not the expression
of exhaustion,—but rather that of a certain autumnal sunniness and
mildness, which the work itself, the maturing of the work, always leaves
behind in its originator. Then the _tempo_ of life slows down—turns
thick and flows with honey—into long pauses, into the belief in _the_
long pause....


                                  377.

_We Homeless Ones._—Among the Europeans of to-day there are not lacking
those who may call themselves homeless ones in a way which is at once a
distinction and an honour; it is by them that my secret wisdom and _gaya
scienza_ is expressly to be laid to heart. For their lot is hard, their
hope uncertain; it is a clever feat to devise consolation for them. But
what good does it do! We children of the future, how _could_ we be at
home in the present? We are unfavourable to all ideals which could make
us feel at home in this frail, broken-down, transition period; and as
regards the "realities" thereof, we do not believe in their _endurance_.
The ice which still carries us has become very thin: the thawing wind
blows; we ourselves, the homeless ones, are an influence that breaks the
ice, and the other all too thin "realities."... We "preserve" nothing,
nor would we return to any past age; we are not at all "liberal," we do
not labour for "progress," we do not need first to stop our ears to the
song of the market-place and the sirens of the future—their song of
"equal rights," "free society," "no longer either lords or slaves," does
not allure us! We do not by any means think it desirable that the
kingdom of righteousness and peace should be established on earth
(because under any circumstances it would be the kingdom of the
profoundest mediocrity and Chinaism); we rejoice in all men, who, like
ourselves, love danger, war and adventure, who do not make compromises,
nor let themselves be captured, conciliated and stunted; we count
ourselves among the conquerors; we ponder over the need of a new order
of things, even of a new slavery—for every strengthening and elevation
of the type "man" also involves a new form of slavery. Is it not obvious
that with all this we must feel ill at ease in an age which claims the
honour of being the most humane, gentle and just that the sun has ever
seen? What a pity that at the mere mention of these fine words, the
thoughts at the back of our minds are all the more unpleasant, that we
see therein only the expression—or the masquerade—of profound weakening,
exhaustion, age, and declining power! What can it matter to us with what
kind of tinsel an invalid decks out his weakness? He may parade it as
his _virtue_; there is no doubt whatever that weakness makes people
gentle, alas, so gentle, so just, so inoffensive, so "humane"!—The
"religion of pity," to which people would like to persuade us—yes, we
know sufficiently well the hysterical little men and women who need this
religion at present as a cloak and adornment! We are no humanitarians;
we should not dare to speak of our "love of mankind"; for that, a person
of our stamp is not enough of an actor! Or not sufficiently
Saint-Simonist, not sufficiently French. A person must have been
affected with a _Gallic_ excess of erotic susceptibility and amorous
impatience even to approach mankind honourably with his lewdness....
Mankind! Was there ever a more hideous old woman among all old women
(unless perhaps it were "the Truth": a question for philosophers)? No,
we do not love Mankind! On the other hand, however, we are not nearly
"German" enough (in the sense in which the word "German" is current at
present) to advocate nationalism and race-hatred, or take delight in the
national heart-itch and blood-poisoning, on account of which the nations
of Europe are at present bounded off and secluded from one another as if
by quarantines. We are too unprejudiced for that, too perverse, too
fastidious; also too well-informed, and too much "travelled." We prefer
much rather to live on mountains, apart and "out of season," in past or
coming centuries, in order merely to spare ourselves the silent rage to
which we know we should be condemned as witnesses of a system of
politics which makes the German nation barren by making it vain, and
which is a _petty_ system besides:—will it not be necessary for this
system to plant itself between two mortal hatreds, lest its own creation
should immediately collapse? Will it not _be obliged_ to desire the
perpetuation of the petty-state system of Europe?... We homeless ones
are too diverse and mixed in race and descent as "modern men," and are
consequently little tempted to participate in the falsified racial
self-admiration and lewdness which at present display themselves in
Germany, as signs of German sentiment, and which strike one as doubly
false and unbecoming in the people with the "historical sense." We are,
in a word—and it shall be our word of honour!—_good Europeans_, the
heirs of Europe, the rich, over-wealthy heirs, also the too deeply
pledged heirs of millenniums of European thought. As such, we have also
outgrown Christianity, and are disinclined to it—and just because we
have grown _out of_ it, because our forefathers were Christians
uncompromising in their Christian integrity, who willingly sacrificed
possessions and positions, blood and country, for the sake of their
belief. We—do the same. For what, then? For our unbelief? For all sorts
of unbelief? Nay, you know better than that, my friends! The hidden
_Yea_ in you is stronger than all the Nays and Perhapses, of which you
and your age are sick; and when you are obliged to put out to sea, you
emigrants, it is—once more a _faith_ which urges you thereto!...


                                  378.

"_And once more Grow Clear._"—We, the generous and rich in spirit, who
stand at the sides of the streets like open fountains and would hinder
no one from drinking from us: we do not know, alas! how to defend
ourselves when we should like to do so; we have no means of preventing
ourselves being made _turbid_ and dark,—we have no means of preventing
the age in which we live casting its "up-to-date rubbish" into us, nor
of hindering filthy birds throwing their excrement, the boys their
trash, and fatigued resting travellers their misery, great and small,
into us. But we do as we have always done: we take whatever is cast into
us down into our depths—for we are deep, we do not forget—_and once more
grow clear_....


                                  379.

_The Fool's Interruption._—It is not a misanthrope who has written this
book: the hatred of men costs too dear to-day. To hate as they formerly
hated _man_, in the fashion of Timon, completely, without qualification,
with all the heart, from the pure _love_ of hatred—for that purpose one
would have to renounce contempt:—and how much refined pleasure, how much
patience, how much benevolence even, do we owe to contempt! Moreover we
are thereby the "elect of God": refined contempt is our taste and
privilege, our art, our virtue perhaps, we, the most modern amongst the
moderns!... Hatred, on the contrary, makes equal, it puts men face to
face, in hatred there is honour; finally, in hatred there is _fear_,
quite a large amount of fear. We fearless ones, however, we, the most
intellectual men of the period, know our advantage well enough to live
without fear as the most intellectual persons of this age. People will
not easily behead us, shut us up, or banish us; they will not even ban
or burn our books. The age loves intellect, it loves us, and needs us,
even when we have to give it to understand that we are artists in
despising; that all intercourse with men is something of a horror to us;
that with all our gentleness, patience, humanity and courteousness, we
cannot persuade our nose to abandon its prejudice against the proximity
of man; that we love nature the more, the less humanly things are done
by her, and that we love art _when_ it is the flight of the artist from
man, or the raillery of the artist at man, or the raillery of the artist
at himself....


                                  380.

_"The Wanderer" Speaks._—In order for once to get a glimpse of our
European morality from a distance, in order to compare it with other
earlier or future moralities, one must do as the traveller who wants to
know the height of the towers of a city: for that purpose he _leaves_
the city. "Thoughts concerning moral prejudices," if they are not to be
prejudices concerning prejudices, presuppose a position _outside of_
morality, some sort of world beyond good and evil, to which one must
ascend, climb, or fly—and in the given case at any rate, a position
beyond _our_ good and evil, an emancipation from all "Europe,"
understood as a sum of inviolable valuations which have become part and
parcel of our flesh and blood. That one _wants_ in fact to get outside,
or aloft, is perhaps a sort of madness, a peculiarly unreasonable "thou
must"—for even we thinkers have our idiosyncrasies of "unfree will"—:
the question is whether one _can_ really get there. That may depend on
manifold conditions: in the main it is a question of how light or how
heavy we are, the problem of our "specific gravity." One must be _very
light_ in order to impel one's will to knowledge to such a distance, and
as it were beyond one's age, in order to create eyes for oneself for the
survey of millenniums, and a pure heaven in these eyes besides! One must
have freed oneself from many things by which we Europeans of to-day are
oppressed, hindered, held down, and made heavy. The man of such a
"Beyond," who wants to get even in sight of the highest standards of
worth of his age, must first of all "surmount" this age in himself—it is
the test of his power—and consequently not only his age, but also his
past aversion and opposition _to_ his age, his suffering _caused by_ his
age, his unseasonableness, his Romanticism....


                                  381.

_The Question of Intelligibility._—One not only wants to be understood
when one writes, but also—quite as certainly—_not_ to be understood. It
is by no means an objection to a book when someone finds it
unintelligible: perhaps this might just have been the intention of its
author,—perhaps he did not _want_ to be understood by "anyone." A
distinguished intellect and taste, when it wants to communicate its
thoughts, always selects its hearers; by selecting them, it at the same
time closes its barriers against "the others." It is there that all the
more refined laws of style have their origin: they at the same time keep
off, they create distance, they prevent "access" (intelligibility, as we
have said,)—while they open the ears of those who are acoustically
related to them. And to say it between ourselves and with reference to
my own case,—I do not desire that either my ignorance, or the vivacity
of my temperament, should prevent me being understood by _you_, my
friends: I certainly do not desire that my vivacity should have that
effect, however much it may impel me to arrive quickly at an object, in
order to arrive at it at all. For I think it is best to do with profound
problems as with a cold bath—quickly in, quickly out. That one does not
thereby get into the depths, that one does not get deep enough _down_—is
a superstition of the hydrophobic, the enemies of cold water; they speak
without experience. Oh! the great cold makes one quick!—And let me ask
by the way: Is it a fact that a thing has been misunderstood and
unrecognised when it has only been touched upon in passing, glanced at,
flashed at? Must one absolutely sit upon it in the first place? Must one
have brooded on it as on an egg? _Diu noctuque incubando_, as Newton
said of himself? At least there are truths of a peculiar shyness and
ticklishness which one can only get hold of suddenly, and in no other
way,—which one must either _take by surprise_, or leave alone....
Finally, my brevity has still another value: on those questions which
pre-occupy me, I must say a great deal briefly, in order that it may be
heard yet more briefly. For as immoralist, one has to take care lest one
ruins innocence, I mean the asses and old maids of both sexes, who get
nothing from life but their innocence; moreover my writings are meant to
fill them with enthusiasm, to elevate them, to encourage them in virtue.
I should be at a loss to know of anything more amusing than to see
enthusiastic old asses and maids moved by the sweet feelings of virtue:
and "that have I seen"—spake Zarathustra. So much with respect to
brevity; the matter stands worse as regards my ignorance, of which I
make no secret to myself. There are hours in which I am ashamed of it;
to be sure there are likewise hours in which I am ashamed of this shame.
Perhaps we philosophers, all of us, are badly placed at present with
regard to knowledge: science is growing, the most learned of us are on
the point of discovering that we know too little. But it would be worse
still if it were otherwise,—if we knew too much; our duty is and
remains, first of all, not to get into confusion about ourselves. We
_are_ different from the learned; although it cannot be denied that
amongst other things we are also learned. We have different needs, a
different growth, a different digestion: we need more, we need also
less. There is no formula as to how much an intellect needs for its
nourishment; if, however, its taste be in the direction of independence,
rapid coming and going, travelling, and perhaps adventure for which only
the swiftest are qualified, it prefers rather to live free on poor fare,
than to be unfree and plethoric. Not fat, but the greatest suppleness
and power is what a good dancer wishes from his nourishment,—and I know
not what the spirit of a philosopher would like better than to be a good
dancer. For the dance is his ideal, and also his art, in the end
likewise his sole piety, his "divine service."...


                                  382.

_Great Healthiness._—We, the new, the nameless, the hard-to-understand,
we firstlings of a yet untried future—we require for a new end also a
new means, namely, a new healthiness, stronger, sharper, tougher, bolder
and merrier than any healthiness hitherto. He whose soul longs to
experience the whole range of hitherto recognised values and
desirabilities, and to circumnavigate all the coasts of this ideal
"Mediterranean Sea," who, from the adventures of his most personal
experience, wants to know how it feels to be a conqueror, and discoverer
of the ideal—as likewise how it is with the artist, the saint, the
legislator, the sage, the scholar, the devotee, the prophet, and the
godly Nonconformist of the old style:—requires one thing above all for
that purpose, _great healthiness_—such healthiness as one not only
possesses, but also constantly acquires and must acquire, because one
continually sacrifices it again, and must sacrifice it!—And now, after
having been long on the way in this fashion, we Argonauts of the ideal,
who are more courageous perhaps than prudent, and often enough
shipwrecked and brought to grief, nevertheless, as said above, healthier
than people would like to admit, dangerously healthy, always healthy
again,—it would seem, as if in recompense for it all, that we have a
still undiscovered country before us, the boundaries of which no one has
yet seen, a beyond to all countries and corners of the ideal known
hitherto, a world so over-rich in the beautiful, the strange, the
questionable, the frightful, and the divine, that our curiosity as well
as our thirst for possession thereof, have got out of hand—alas! that
nothing will now any longer satisfy us! How could we still be content
with _the man of the present day_ after such peeps, and with such a
craving in our conscience and consciousness? What a pity; but it is
unavoidable that we should look on the worthiest aims and hopes of the
man of the present day with ill-concealed amusement, and perhaps should
no longer look at them. Another ideal runs on before us, a strange,
tempting ideal, full of danger, to which we should not like to persuade
any one, because we do not so readily acknowledge any one's _right
thereto_: the ideal of a spirit who plays naïvely (that is to say
involuntarily and from overflowing abundance and power) with everything
that has hitherto been called holy, good, inviolable, divine; to whom
the loftiest conception which the people have reasonably made their
measure of value, would already imply danger, ruin, abasement, or at
least relaxation, blindness, or temporary self-forgetfulness; the ideal
of a humanly superhuman welfare and benevolence, which may often enough
appear _inhuman_, for example, when put by the side of all past
seriousness on earth, and in comparison with all past solemnities in
bearing, word, tone, look, morality and pursuit, as their truest
involuntary parody,— but with which, nevertheless, perhaps _the great
seriousness_ only commences, the proper interrogation mark is set up,
the fate of the soul changes, the hour-hand moves, and tragedy
_begins_....


                                  383.

_Epilogue._—But while I slowly, slowly finish the painting of this
sombre interrogation-mark, and am still inclined to remind my readers of
the virtues of right reading—oh, what forgotten and unknown virtues—it
comes to pass that the wickedest, merriest, gnome-like laughter resounds
around me: the spirits of my book themselves pounce upon me, pull me by
the ears, and call me to order. "We cannot endure it any longer," they
shout to me, "away, away with this raven-black music. Is it not clear
morning round about us? And green, soft ground and turf, the domain of
the dance? Was there ever a better hour in which to be joyful? Who will
sing us a song, a morning song, so sunny, so light and so fledged that
it will _not_ scare the tantrums,—but will rather invite them to take
part in the singing and dancing. And better a simple rustic bagpipe than
such weird sounds, such toad-croakings, grave-voices and marmot-pipings,
with which you have hitherto regaled us in your wilderness, Mr Anchorite
and Musician of the Future! No! Not such tones! But let us strike up
something more agreeable and more joyful!"—You would like to have it so,
my impatient friends? Well! Who would not willingly accord with your
wishes? My bagpipe is waiting, and my voice also—it may sound a little
hoarse; take it as it is! don't forget we are in the mountains! But what
you will hear is at least new; and if you do not understand it, if you
misunderstand the _singer_, what does it matter! That—has always been
"The Singer's Curse."[14] So much the more distinctly can you hear his
music and melody, so much the better also can you—dance to his piping.
_Would you like_ to do that?...

-----

Footnote 11:

  In German the expression _Kopf zu waschen_, besides the literal sense,
  also means "to give a person a sound drubbing."—TR.

Footnote 12:

  "_Germany, Germany, above all_": the first line of the German national
  song.—TR.

Footnote 13:

  An allusion to the German Proverb, "Handwerk hat einen goldenen
  Boden."—TR.

Footnote 14:

  Title of the well-known poem of Uhland.—TR.